PMID	n	captured_group	abstract
9593960	12	n = 12	Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to examine the pattern of cortical activity during a picture naming task. Subjects (n=12) had to covertly name either animals or furniture items. Functional scanning was performed using a conventional 1.5-Tesla whole-body MRI system. Images obtained during naming the two categories were compared using a non-parametric test. The study revealed evidence for domain-specific lexical regions in left middle, right middle and inferior frontal areas, as well as in superior and middle temporal areas. The results corroborate neuropsychological data and demonstrate directly and non-invasively in human volunteers that semantic representations in frontal and temporal areas are, to some degree, localized and possibly implemented as multiple maps. A completely distributed storage of semantic information is rendered unlikely.
9862924	16	n = 16	Temporal and intensity coding of pain in human cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 80:3312-3320, 1998. We used a high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) technique in healthy right-handed volunteers to demonstrate cortical areas displaying changes of activity significantly related to the time profile of the perceived intensity of experimental somatic pain over the course of several minutes. Twenty-four subjects (ascorbic acid group) received a subcutaneous injection of a dilute ascorbic acid solution into the dorsum of one  foot, inducing prolonged burning pain (peak pain intensity on a 0-100 scale: 48 +/- 3, mean +/- SE; duration: 11.9 +/- 0.8 min). fMRI data sets were continuously acquired for approximately 20 min, beginning 5 min before and lasting 15 min after the onset of stimulation, from two sagittal planes on the medial hemispheric wall contralateral to the stimulated site, including the cingulate cortex and the putative foot representation area of the primary somatosensory cortex (SI). Neural clusters whose fMRI signal time courses were positively or negatively correlated (P < 0.0005) with the individual pain intensity curve were  identified by cross-correlation statistics in all 24 volunteers. The spatial extent of the identified clusters was linearly related (P < 0.0001) to peak pain  intensity. Regional analyses showed that positively correlated clusters were present in the majority of subjects in SI, cingulate, motor, and premotor cortex. Negative correlations were found predominantly in medial parietal, perigenual cingulate, and medial prefrontal regions. To test whether these neural changes were due to aspecific arousal or emotional reactions, related either to anticipation or presence of pain, fMRI experiments were performed with the same protocol in two additional groups of volunteers, subjected either to subcutaneous saline injection (saline: n = 16), inducing mild short-lasting pain (peak pain intensity 23 +/- 4; duration 2.8 +/- 0.6 min) or to nonnoxious mechanical stimulation of the skin (controls: n = 16) at the same body site. Subjects did not know in advance which stimulus would occur. The spatial extent of neural clusters whose signal time courses were positively or negatively correlated with  the mean pain intensity curve of subjects injected with ascorbic acid was significantly larger (P < 0.001) in the ascorbic acid group than both saline and  controls, suggesting that the observed responses were specifically related to pain intensity and duration. These findings reveal distributed cortical systems,  including parietal areas as well as cingulate and frontal regions, involved in dynamic encoding of pain intensity over time, a process of great biological and clinical relevance.
9862924	16	n = 16
11553288	8	n = 8	Dexterous manipulation of delicate objects requires exquisite control of fingertip forces. We have used functional magnetic resonance imaging to identify  brain regions involved in the skillful scaling of these forces when normal human  subjects (n = 8) held with precision grip a small object (weight 200 g) in the dominant right hand. In one condition, they used their normal, automatically scaled grip force. The object was held gently in a second condition; the isometric grip force was maintained just above the critical level at which the object would have slipped. In a third condition, the force was increased to hold  the object with a more firm grip. The supplementary and cingulate motor areas were significantly more active during the gentle force condition than during either of the other conditions in all subjects, despite weaker contractions of the hand muscles. In addition, the left primary sensorimotor cortex, the ventral  premotor cortex and the left posterior parietal cortex were more strongly activated during gentle than during normal grasping. These novel results suggest  that these regions are specifically involved in dexterous scaling of fingertip forces during object manipulation.
11796770	6	n = 6	OBJECTIVES: Functional reorganisation of the motor or sensory cortex has been demonstrated in animals after section of mixed peripheral nerves. Here functional changes in the motor cortex specifically after peripheral motor denervation in humans are investigated. METHODS: Functional MRI (fMRI) was used to study brain activation during a finger flexion-extension task in patients with a late onset,  acquired pure motor neuropathy (n=6), contrasting results with those from patients with pure sensory neuropathies (n=4) or healthy controls (n=7). RESULTS: Increases in the extent of activation in the motor cortex both ipsilateral and contralateral to the hand moved were found in the patients with motor neuropathy. The neuroanatomical localisation of the mixed contralateral sensorimotor cortex activation volume was more posterior for the patients with motor neuropathy than  for the healthy controls (mean difference, 12 mm, p<0.05). The pure sensory neuropathy group by contrast showed no change in the extent of activation relative to healthy controls and a trend for more anterior primary sensorimotor cortex activation (p<0.06). To test whether the increased activation volumes found in patients with motor neuropathy were a result simply of factors such as increased effort with movement rather than the motor denervation, patients with hand weakness from inclusion body myositis (n=4) were studied while making similar hand movements. No differences in either the numbers of significantly activated voxels or in their localisation were found relative to healthy controls (n=10). CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a novel demonstration that peripheral  denervation (as distinguished from factors related to weakness) leads to functional reorganisation of the sensorimotor cortex in the adult brain. This suggests that adaptive responses to motor denervation involve the central as well as the peripheral nervous system.
11796770	4	n = 4
11796770	7	n = 7
11796770	4	n = 4
11796770	10	n = 10
11822992	13	n = 13	BACKGROUND: Structural deficiencies within limbic and prefrontal regions may contribute to the characteristic drug-seeking and drug-taking behaviors that prevail in persons dependent on cocaine. To date, a focal structural analysis of  the brains of cocaine patients has not been undertaken. METHODS: We used voxel based morphometry in conjunction with statistical parametric mapping on the structural magnetic resonance images of cocaine-dependent (n = 13) and cocaine-naive individuals (n = 16) to assess differences between the two groups in gray and white matter concentration. RESULTS: We report a decrease in gray matter concentration in the ventromedial orbitofrontal, anterior cingulate, anteroventral insular, and superior temporal cortices of cocaine patients in comparison to controls (p <.01 corrected for multiple comparisons). The average percentage decrease in gray matter concentration within a region ranged from 5% to 11%. White matter concentration did not differ between groups. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the brains of cocaine patients are structurally dissimilar from those of nondrug-using controls. The differences were detected in regions involved in decision-making, behavioral inhibition and assignation of emotional valence to environmental stimuli and, hence, may contribute to some of the behavioral deficits characteristic of chronic cocaine users.
11822992	16	n = 16
11904454	14	n = 14	We used functional MRI to test the hypothesis that emotional states can selectively influence cognition-related neural activity in lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), as evidence for an integration of emotion and cognition. Participants (n = 14) watched short videos intended to induce emotional states (pleasant/approach related, unpleasant/withdrawal related, or neutral). After each video, the participants were scanned while performing a 3-back working memory task having either words or faces as stimuli. Task-related neural activity in bilateral PFC showed a predicted pattern: an Emotion x Stimulus crossover interaction, with no main effects, with activity predicting task performance. This highly specific result indicates that emotion and higher cognition can be truly integrated, i.e., at some point of processing, functional specialization is lost, and emotion and cognition conjointly and equally contribute to the control  of thought and behavior. Other regions in lateral PFC showed hemispheric specialization for emotion and for stimuli separately, consistent with a hierarchical and hemisphere-based mechanism of integration.
12067697	5	n = 5	Brain areas associated with both nondeclarative categorization and recognition memory were identified and contrasted using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of healthy volunteers. Activity during dot-pattern categorization and recognition were compared with a control task (counting dots) in two separate groups of participants (n=5 each). The network of areas associated with nondeclarative categorization was found to include bilateral inferior prefrontal  and parietal cortical areas that have been implicated in several other studies of categorization. During recognition, increased activity was found in posterior visual areas, the precuneus, posterior cingulate and right prefrontal cortex. Using the common control condition as a reference, recognition and categorization were contrasted and recognition was found to evoke more activity in posterior early visual cortex, the precuneus, right medial temporal lobe and right dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex. Previous research has implicated changes in visual representation in learning a category of dot-pattern by comparing activity evoked by categorical and non-categorical stimuli. The current findings support those results and additionally identify brain areas active during categorization  that are involved in expressing this category knowledge.
12165364	17	n = 17	The aims of this study were to: (1) assess the effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) on brain activity in depressed patients as measured by single photon emission tomography (SPECT); (2) evaluate the predictive value of brain SPECT on the antidepressant efficacy of rTMS. Patients (n=17) received 1600 rTMS stimuli at a rate of 10 Hz, 5 days per week for 2 weeks to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Whole brain SPECT data were acquired using Tc99m-Bicisate. Regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was correlated with the % change in the 28-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale Score (Delta-HDRS) and a semiquantitative region of interest (ROI) analysis was conducted. Prior to rTMS there was a significant left-right asymmetry favoring the right, whereas 2 weeks  after the rTMS treatment this asymmetry was reversed. The rCBF in limbic structures was negatively correlated with the outcome and rCBF in several neocortical areas was positively correlated. Brain SPECT can provide information  about mechanisms of action of rTMS and may have predictive value for the antidepressant efficacy of rTMS.
12244080	4	n = 4	Reorganization after early brain injuries is not only determined by the maturational stage of the CNS at the time of the insult (timing), but also by the structural properties, location and extent of the lesion. This study addresses the impact of different lesion extents on the type of reorganization induced in a cohort of patients with lesions of uniform structure and location (unilateral periventricular defects) and similar timing (early third trimester of pregnancy). Twelve young adult patients with congenital hemiparesis and 10 age-matched controls were studied. The severity of structural damage to hand motor projections of the cortico-spinal tract was assessed on semi-coronal MRI reconstructions along anatomical landmarks of cortico-spinal tract somatotopy. The functional integrity of these crossed cortico-spinal projections in the affected hemisphere, as well as the presence of any abnormal ipsilateral projections to the paretic hand, was examined by transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Cortical activation during simple voluntary hand movements was studied by functional MRI (fMRI). Patients with small lesions (SL; n = 4) and only mild hand motor impairment possessed intact crossed cortico-spinal projections to the paretic hand, whereas no motor response could be elicited by TMS of the affected hemisphere in those with large lesions (LL; n = 6) and more severe hand motor impairment. Evidence for compensatory recruitment of the unaffected hemisphere was found in both subgroups. In the SL group, fMRI demonstrated ipsilateral activation of premotor areas, without any abnormal projections to the paretic hand originating from these sites. In the LL group, such abnormal ipsilateral projections to the paretic hand were indeed found, and  fMRI confirmed cortical activation of an abnormal ipsilateral hand motor representation in the primary sensorimotor region of the unaffected hemisphere. Two patients with intermediate-sized lesions presented combined features of both  groups (SL, LL). In conclusion, this study provides evidence that the type of cortico-spinal reorganization depends on the extent of the brain lesion. We propose that involvement of the ipsilateral hemisphere can be (i) of the premotor type, i.e. without ipsilateral motor projections but with significant activation  of ipsilateral premotor areas, or (ii) of the primary motor type, i.e. with abnormal ipsilateral cortico-spinal projections to the paretic hand.
12244080	6	n = 6
12477698	20	n = 20	The aim of the present study was to compare eyeblink conditioning in cerebellar patients with lesions including the territory of the superior cerebellar artery (SCA) and in patients with lesions restricted to the territory of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA). The cerebellar areas known to be most critical in eyeblink conditioning based on animal data (i.e. Larsell lobule H VI and interposed nucleus) are commonly supplied by the SCA. Eyeblink conditioning was expected to be impaired in SCA, but not in PICA patients. A total of 27 cerebellar patients and 25 age-matched controls were tested. Cerebellar lesions were primarily unilateral (n = 20). Most patients suffered from ischaemic infarctions of the SCA (n = 11) or the PICA (n = 13). The other patients presented with cerebellar tumours (n = 2) and cerebellar agenesis (n = 1). The extent of the cortical lesion (i.e. which lobuli were affected) and possible involvement of the cerebellar nuclei was determined by 3D-MRI. As expected, the ability to acquire classically conditioned eyeblink responses was significantly reduced in the group of all cerebellar patients compared with the controls. In the patients with unilateral cerebellar lesions, conditioning deficits were present ipsilaterally. In SCA patients with lesions including hemispheral lobules VI and Crus I, eyeblink conditioning was significantly reduced on the affected side compared with the unaffected side. No significant difference between the affected and unaffected sides was present in patients with lesions restricted to  the common PICA territory (i.e. Crus II and below). Conditioning deficits were neither significantly different in SCA patients with pure cortical lesions compared with SCA patients with additional nuclear impairment nor in SCA patients with unilateral lesions compared with SCA patients with bilateral lesions. To summarize, unilateral cortical lesions of the superior cerebellum appear to be sufficient to reduce eyeblink conditioning in humans significantly.
12477698	11	n = 11
12477698	13	n = 13
12477698	2	n = 2
12477698	1	n = 1
12559652	10	n = 10	BACKGROUND: The goal of this study was to examine the neuronal circuitry underlying different emotional states (neutral, sad, anxious, and traumatic) in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in traumatized subjects versus traumatized subjects without PTSD. METHODS: Traumatized subjects with (n = 10) and without (n = 10) PTSD were studied using the script-driven symptom provocation paradigm adapted to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) at a 4 Tesla field strength. RESULTS: Compared to the trauma-exposed comparison group, PTSD subjects showed significantly less activation of the thalamus and the anterior cingulate gyrus (area 32) in all three emotional states (sad, anxious, and traumatic). CONCLUSION: These findings suggest thalamic and anterior cingulate dysfunction in the recollection of traumatic as well as other negative events. Thalamic and anterior cingulate dysfunction may underlie emotion dysregulation often observed  clinically in PTSD.
12559652	10	n = 10
12595193	12	n = 12	Questions pertaining to the neurobiological effects of psychotherapy are now considered among the most topical in psychiatry. With respect to this issue, positron emission tomography (PET) findings indicate that cognitive and behavioral modifications, occurring in a psychotherapeutic context, can lead to regional brain metabolic changes in patients with major depression or obsessive-compulsive disorder. The goal of the present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, which constitutes the first neuroimaging investigation of the effects of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) using an emotional activation paradigm, was to probe the effects of CBT on the neural correlates of spider phobia. In order to do so, fMRI was used in subjects suffering from spider phobia (n = 12) to measure, before and after effective CBT, regional brain activity during the viewing of film excerpts depicting spiders. Normal control subjects were also scanned (once) while they were exposed to the same film excerpts. Results showed that, in phobic subjects before CBT, the transient state of fear triggered, during the viewing of the phobogenic stimuli,  was correlated with significant activation of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann area-BA 10), the parahippocampal gyrus, and the visual associative cortical areas, bilaterally. For normal control subjects (n = 13), only the left middle occipital gyrus and the right inferior temporal gyrus were significantly activated. In phobic subjects before CBT, the activation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA 10) may reflect the use of metacognitive strategies aimed at self-regulating the fear triggered by the spider film excerpts, whereas the parahippocampal activation might be related to an automatic reactivation of the contextual fear memory that led to the development of avoidance behavior and the maintenance of spider phobia. After successful completion of CBT, no significant activation was found in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA 10) or the parahippocampal gyrus. These findings suggest that a psychotherapeutic approach, such as CBT, has the potential to modify the dysfunctional neural circuitry associated with anxiety disorders. They further indicate that the changes made at the mind level, within a psychotherapeutic context, are able to functionally "rewire" the brain.
12595193	13	n = 13
12657700	17	n = 17	If attention is divided during learning, memory suffers. Nevertheless, individuals can learn information with divided attention. This event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study (n = 17) investigated what neural processes support (1) learning with divided attention and (2) retrieval of information learned with divided attention. Participants encoded words (Is the word abstract or concrete?) while performing an auditory discrimination task (press a button whenever an auditory pattern changes). The auditory task was easy or hard, depending on the similarity of the patterns. A behavioral study indicated that detailed ("recollective") information was more likely to be present for words encoded with the easy versus the hard concurrent task. Words encoded with the hard versus the easy concurrent task, in contrast, were more likely to rely on less detailed ("familiarity"-based) information. fMRI revealed  encoding-related activation in the left prefrontal cortex (PFC) and left hippocampus that was linked to successful memory formation only for items encoded with the easy task. In contrast, activation in the right PFC and left parahippocampal gyrus was linked to successful memory for all items. Thus, successful encoding with the hard concurrent task was supported by a subset of the regions recruited for successful encoding with the easy task. The neural processes recruited for successful retrieval also depended on the encoding condition: The left PFC was disproportionately recruited for retrieval of items encoded with the easy task, whereas the right PFC was disproportionately recruited for retrieval of items encoded with the hard task. These findings may reflect left-sided specialization for recollective memories and right-sided specialization for familiarity-based traces.
12738340	13	n = 13	Functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to compare cortical activation patterns in healthy volunteers with those in patients with schizophrenia during a modified verbal Stroop task. Healthy subjects (n=13) and patients with schizophrenia (n=13) on stable antipsychotic treatment, matched on demographic variables, were included. Patients were preselected on the basis of good performance on a selective attention test. Patients with schizophrenia showed a significantly increased pattern of activation in the left and right inferior frontal cortex and the anterior cingulate cortex. A significant negative correlation between activation of the left prefrontal cortex and accuracy in the  modified Stroop test was observed for healthy controls but not schizophrenia patients. Although both groups recruited the prefrontal cortex during the modified Stroop task, for the schizophrenia patients this activation was bilateral, whereas for the controls this activation was primarily in the left hemisphere, suggesting that patients with schizophrenia recruited more prefrontal regions to perform the task with the same accuracy as healthy controls. Our findings of increased activity across multiple areas of the brain, including dorsolateral frontal cortex and anterior cingulate, in patients with schizophrenia who perform relatively well on a task of selective attention give further evidence that task performance may be a confounding factor in the interpretation of neuroimaging results.
12738340	13	n = 13
12814585	10	n = 10	Several functional neuroimaging studies have been carried out in healthy subjects to investigate the neural correlates of sadness. Importantly, there is little consistency among the results of these studies. Hypothesizing that individual differences may account for the discrepancies among these investigations, we conducted two functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies to identify the neural circuitry underlying this basic emotion. In these two methodologically identical studies, two different groups (n = 10 for each study) of healthy female subjects were scanned while they were experiencing a transient state of sadness induced by viewing sad film excerpts. In the first of these studies, sadness was  correlated with significant loci of activation in the anterior temporal pole and  insula (P < 0.05, corrected). In the second study, however, sadness was correlated with significant activation in the orbitofrontal and medial prefrontal cortices (P < 0.05, corrected). In addition, individual statistical parametric maps revealed a marked degree of interindividual variability in both Study 1 and  Study 2. These results strongly support the view that individual differences may  be responsible for the inconsistencies found in the literature regarding the neural substrates of sadness and of other basic emotions. These findings also suggest that individual data should be reported in addition to group data, because they provide useful information about the variability present in the subjects investigated and, thus, about the typicality and generalizability of the results.
12814589	6	n = 6	Whereas converging lines of evidence suggest that anesthetic-induced unconsciousness may result from disruption of functional interactions within neural networks involving the thalamus and cerebral cortex, the effects anesthetics have on human thalamocortical connectivity remain unexamined with current neuroimaging techniques. To address this issue we retrospectively analyzed positron emission tomography data from 11 volunteers scanned for regional cerebral glucose utilization (rCMRglu) when awake and again during isoflurane- (n = 6) or halothane- (n = 5) induced unconsciousness using statistical parametric mapping (SPM99) and structural equation modeling. A main effect analysis, contrasting awake and unconscious metabolic activity, localized  a discrete region of the left va/vl thalamus whose relative rCMRglu activity was  significantly suppressed (P < 0.05, corrected) during the unconscious state. To identify brain regions whose functional connectivity with this region of the thalamus was impaired during the unconscious state, a psychophysiological interaction analysis was performed. This analysis revealed effects predominantly  in topographically related areas of the primary motor and supplementary motor association cortices. Structural equation modeling of a neuroanatomical network encompassing these empirically identified regions revealed significant state-related changes in effective connectivity (chi(2)diff (6)-15.88; P < 0.05)  which primarily involved impairment of thalamocortical and corticocortical projections during the unconscious state. These findings support the hypothesis that a mechanistic component underlying general-anesthetic-induced unconsciousness involves disruption of functional interactions within thalamocortical neural networks.
12814589	5	n = 5
12880821	12	n = 12	Single subject and group analyses (n = 12) showed that the eyes-open and eyes-closed states in complete darkness considerably and consistently differ in the patterns of associated brain activation in fMRI. During nonchanging external  stimulation, ocular motor and attentional systems were activated when the eyes were open; the visual, somatosensory, vestibular, and auditory systems were activated when the eyes were closed. These data suggest that there are two different states of mental activity: with the eyes closed, an "interoceptive" state characterized by imagination and multisensory activity and with the eyes open, an "exteroceptive" state characterized by attention and ocular motor activity. Our study also shows that the chosen baseline condition may have a considerable impact on activation patterns and on the interpretation of brain activation studies.
14689505	12	n = 12	Functional MRI (fMRI) was used to examine the neural correlates of depth of processing during encoding and retrieval of photographs in older normal volunteers (n = 12). Separate scans were run during deep (natural vs. man-made decision) and shallow (color vs. black-and-white decision) encoding and during old/new recognition of pictures initially presented in one of the two encoding conditions. A baseline condition consisting of a scrambled, color photograph was  used as a contrast in each scan. Recognition accuracy was greater for the pictures on which semantic decisions were made at encoding, consistent with the expected levels of processing effect. A mixed-effects model was used to compare fMRI differences between conditions (deep-baseline vs. shallow-baseline) in both  encoding and retrieval. For encoding, this contrast revealed greater activation associated with deep encoding in several areas, including the left parahippocampal gyrus (PHG), left middle temporal gyrus, and left anterior thalamus. Increased left hippocampal, right dorsolateral, and inferior frontal activations were found for recognition of items that had been presented in the deep relative to the shallow encoding condition. We speculate that the modulation of activity in these regions by the depth of processing manipulation shows that these regions support effective encoding and successful retrieval. A direct comparison between encoding and retrieval revealed greater activation during retrieval in the medial temporal (right hippocampus and bilateral PHG), anterior  cingulate, and bilateral prefrontal (inferior and dorsolateral). Most notably, greater right posterior PHG was found during encoding compared to recognition. Focusing on the medial temporal lobe (MTL) region, our results suggest a greater  involvement of both anterior MTL and prefrontal regions in retrieval compared to  encoding.
14732592	17	n = 17	BACKGROUND: Findings from postmortem studies suggest reduced prefrontal cortical  thickness in schizophrenia; however, cortical thickness in first-episode schizophrenia has not been evaluated using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). METHODS: Prefrontal cortical thickness was measured using MRI in first-episode schizophrenia patients (n = 17), first-episode affective psychosis patients (n =  17), and normal control subjects (n = 17); subjects were age-matched within 2 years and within a narrow age range (18-29 years). A previous study using the same subjects reported reduced prefrontal gray matter volume in first-episode schizophrenia. Manual editing was performed on those prefrontal segmentations before cortical thickness was measured. RESULTS: Prefrontal cortical thickness was not significantly different among groups. Prefrontal gray matter volume and thickness were, however, positively correlated in both schizophrenia and control  subjects. The product of boundary complexity and thickness, an alternative measure of volume, was positively correlated with volume for all three groups. Finally, age and age at first medication were negatively correlated with prefrontal cortical thickness only in first-episode schizophrenia. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the potential usefulness of MRI for the study of cortical thickness abnormalities in schizophrenia. Correlations between cortical thickness and age and between cortical thickness and age at first medication suggest that the longer the schizophrenic process has been operative, the thinner the prefrontal cortex, although this needs confirmation in a longitudinal study.
14732592	17	n = 17
14732592	17	n = 17
14749289	69	n = 69	Schizophrenia is a highly heritable disorder that typically develops in early adult life. Structural imaging studies have indicated that patients with the illness, and to some extent their unaffected relatives, have subtle deficits in several brain regions, including prefrontal and temporal lobes. It is, however, not known how this inherited vulnerability leads to psychosis. This study used a  covert verbal initiation fMRI task previously shown to elicit frontal and temporal activity (the Hayling sentence completion task) to examine this issue. A large (n = 69) number of young participants at high risk of developing schizophrenia for genetic reasons took part, together with a matched group of healthy controls (n = 21). At the time of investigation, none had any psychotic disorder, but on detailed interview some of the high-risk participants (n = 27) reported isolated psychotic symptoms. The study aimed to determine: (i) whether there were activation differences that occurred in all subjects with a genetic risk of schizophrenia (i.e. 'trait' effects); and (ii) whether there were activation differences that only occurred in those at high risk who had isolated  psychotic symptoms ('state' effects). No activation differences were found in regions commonly reported to be abnormal in the established illness, namely the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex or in the temporal lobes, but group differences of apparent genetic cause were evident in medial prefrontal, thalamic and cerebellar regions. In addition, differences in activation in those with symptoms were found in the intraparietal sulcus. No significant differences in performance were found between the groups, and all subjects were antipsychotic naive. These findings therefore suggest that vulnerability to schizophrenia may be inherited as a disruption in a fronto-thalamic-cerebellar network, and the earliest changes specific to the psychotic state may be related to hyperactivation in the parietal lobe.
14749289	21	n = 21
14749289	27	n = 27
14980558	12	n = 12	While a detailed understanding of brain activity with hand movements has developed, less is known about the functional anatomy of motor control for foot movements. Here we have used fMRI to define brain activity associated with unilateral foot extension and flexion, component movements of gait. We studied brain responses to visually cued active and passive movements and periods of either preparation (before active movement) or anticipation (before passive movement) with a pseudo-randomized block design. A mixed-effects (n = 12) contrast of the active movement condition vs. rest identified brain activation in regions including the medial wall of the primary sensorimotor cortex, consistent  with expected somatotopy. Medial wall activation during passive movement vs. rest was less intense and localized to the same region. Frontal and association cortices were more active during preparation or anticipation periods than during  the movements themselves. A contrast of preparation to move vs. active movement showed significant activation in the medial frontal and frontopolar gyri and the  precuneus. Contrast of the anticipation of movement with the passive movement condition revealed activation in the dorsal premotor cortex and precuneus. Our study thus provides evidence for somatotopy in multiple functional regions in the motor control network. The anterior prefrontal activity is involved in the preparation for cued movement with distinct regions of the medial motor cortex (including SMA and CMA) preferentially involved in motor program planning and execution. This direct characterization of brain activation patterns associated with foot movements promises use of fMRI for the functional analysis of pathologies of gait.
14980562	15	n = 15	Empathy requires the ability to map the feelings of others onto our own nervous system. Until recently, there was no plausible mechanism to explain how such a mapping might occur. The discovery of mirror neurons, however, suggests that the  nervous system is capable of mapping the observed actions of others onto the premotor cortex of the self, at least for reaching and grasping movements. Is there a mirroring system for emotive actions, such as facial expression? Subjects (N = 15; all right-handed; eight men, seven women) watched movies of facial expressions (smile or frown) and hand movements (move index or middle finger) while brain activity was imaged using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Subjects watched the movies under three different conditions: passive viewing, active imitation, and an active motor control. Subjects also performed a verb generation task to functionally identify language-processing areas. We found evidence for a common cortical imitation circuit for both face and hand imitation, consisting of Broca's area, bilateral dorsal and ventral premotor areas, right superior temporal gyrus (STG), supplementary motor area, posterior temporo-occipital cortex, and cerebellar areas. For faces, passive viewing led to significant activation in the right ventral premotor area, whereas imitation produced bilateral activation. This result is consistent with evidence for right  hemisphere (RH) dominance for emotional processing, and suggests that there may be a right hemisphere mirroring system that could provide a neural substrate for  empathy.
15003765	9	n = 9	OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to examine cerebellar areas related to conditioning of the nociceptive leg withdrawal reflex using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Because of the aversive nature of the unconditioned stimulus effects of accompanying fear conditioning were expected. METHODS: In 20 healthy adult subjects leg withdrawal reflex conditioning was performed using a standard delay protocol during MR-scanning. Electromyographic recordings from the anterior tibial and biceps femoris muscles  were used to quantify conditioned responses. Fear-related changes of heart rate were assessed. RESULTS: In the group of all subjects a significant increase of cerebellar activation was found in the anterior and posterior vermis. In the group of subjects (n=9) who showed conditioned leg withdrawal responses cerebellar activation was more pronounced in parts of the anterior vermis, which  correspond to the known leg representation. In the group of subjects (n=11) who did not develop conditioned responses cerebellar activation was more pronounced in the posterolateral hemispheres. Changes of heart rate, however, did not significantly differ between groups. CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that areas within the anterior vermis are involved in conditioning of the leg withdrawal response. The present results, however, do not allow to differentiate between motor performance, learning or timing-related processes. Areas in the posterior vermis and cerebellar hemispheres may be related to concomitant fear conditioning. SIGNIFICANCE: Results of the present event-related fMRI study suggest involvement of the human cerebellum in conditioning of the nociceptive leg withdrawal response.
15003765	11	n = 11
15110735	6	n = 6	BACKGROUND: Dopamine agonists and antagonists can reduce abnormal movements and vocalizations (tics) in Tourette syndrome (TS); however, dopamine-responsive abnormal function in specific brain regions has not been directly demonstrated in TS. We sought to identify dopamine-modulated brain regions that function abnormally in TS by combining functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a working memory (WM) task, and infusion of the dopamine prodrug levodopa (while blocking dopamine production outside the brain). METHODS: We obtained complete fMRI data in 8 neuroleptic-naive adults with a chronic tic disorder and in 10 well-matched tic-free control subjects. RESULTS: Different task-sensitive brain regions responded differently to the WM task depending on levodopa status and diagnostic group (analysis of variance [ANOVA], p <.001). Four regions showed interactions with diagnosis (ANOVA, p <.001). In TS subjects, the task induced excessive brain activity in parietal cortex, medial frontal gyrus, and thalamus.  Levodopa normalized the excess activity. In left parietal cortex, the degree of normalization was greater in patients with higher levodopa plasma concentrations  (n = 6; Spearman's r = -.84, p =.04) and a greater degree of diagnostic confidence of TS (r = -.71, p =.05). CONCLUSIONS: These results are consistent with a dopamine-influenced functional abnormality of brain response in TS and suggest testable hypotheses about the mechanism by which dopamine antagonists and agonists alleviate tics.
15115734	44	n = 44	Three previous studies using the GO/NOGO task were examined to characterize the pattern of functional activation seen during error-related processing. The large  sample size (n = 44) also allowed investigation of the influence of individual differences in age, sex, self-reported absentmindedness and reaction speed on the level of activation. Errors were seen to activate a network of regions including  the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA), bilateral insula, thalamus and right inferior parietal lobule. Split-half comparisons performed for each of the individual difference variables indicated greater ACC and pre-SMA activation for older subjects while slower responders showed greater activation in the parietal, lateral PFC, insula and ACC regions. Whereas males and females demonstrated equivalent levels of activation in both the ACC and insula, self-reported absentmindedness related to reduced activation  in these regions. Our review of the current imaging literature on error-related activation indicates that, despite the use of a variety of other cognitive paradigms, the network of regions identified here is consistent with these previous studies, suggesting that these regions are critical to a 'general' error-related response. Furthermore, this response is, in part, influenced by individual differences in both demographic characteristics and behavioural performance.
15145996	14	n = 14	BACKGROUND: The cerebellum is of potential interest for understanding adaptive responses in motor control in patients with multiple sclerosis because of the high intrinsic synaptic plasticity of this brain region. OBJECTIVE: To assess the relative roles of interactions between the neocortex and the cerebellum using measures of functional connectivity. METHODS: A role for altered neocortical-cerebellar functional connectivity in adaptive responses to injury from multiple sclerosis was tested using 1.5 T functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during figure writing with the dominant right hand in patients with predominantly early relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. RESULTS: Patients (n = 14) showed a more bihemispheric pattern of activation in motor cortex than healthy controls (n = 11). Correlations between task related signal changes in neocortical and cerebellar regions of interest were used as a measure  of functional connectivity. Healthy controls showed strong functional connectivity between the left motor cortex and the right cerebellar dentate nucleus. Significant connectivity between the left primary motor cortex and the right dentate was not found in patients. However, patients had significant connectivity between the left premotor neocortex and the ipsilateral (left) cerebellar cortex (crus I), which was not found in healthy controls. CONCLUSIONS: Changes in apparent cerebellar-neocortical functional connectivity may mediate potentially adaptive changes in brain motor control in patients with multiple sclerosis. Similar changes in the cerebellum and premotor cortex have been reported in the healthy brain during motor learning, suggesting that common mechanisms may contribute to normal motor learning and motor recovery after injury from multiple sclerosis.
15145996	11	n = 11
15158422	17	n = 17	BACKGROUND: Females appear to be more sensitive and responsive to social cues, including threat signals, than are males. Recent theoretical models suggest that  developmental changes in brain functioning play important roles in the emergence  of such gender differences. METHODS: We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine developmental and gender differences in activation of neural structures thought to mediate attention to emotional faces depicting varying degrees of threat. Analyses focused on the orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala, and anterior cingulate cortex during the evaluation of threat conveyed by faces. Healthy adolescents (n = 17; 53% male) and adults (n = 17; 53% male) were scanned while they rated how threatening pictures of neutral and emotional (angry, fearful, or happy) faces appeared. RESULTS: Results indicate significant interactions among age, gender, and face type for activation during explicit threat monitoring. In particular, adult women activated orbitofrontal cortex and  amygdala selectively to unambiguous threat (angry) cues, while adult men showed a less discriminating pattern of activation. No gender differences were evident for adolescents, who as a group resembled adult males. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that there are gender differences in patterns of neural responses to emotional faces that are not fully apparent until adulthood.
15158422	17	n = 17
15246452	8	n = 8	The aim of this study was to investigate pathophysiological changes at an early stage of clinical Huntington's disease (HD) using a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study and a serial reaction time task paradigm. Mildly affected and presymptomatic HD subjects (n = 8) and healthy normal controls (NC, n = 12) were studied. A group behavioral effect of implicit learning was seen only in the control population. Individual statistical parametric mapping (SPM) analysis showed more consistent activation of the caudate nucleus and putamen in the NC group. In the HD group, the group average SPM showed significant activation in the right head of caudate nucleus, as well as bilateral thalami, left middle temporal, right superior temporal, right superior frontal, right middle and inferior frontal and right postcentral gyri. In the comparison of between-group differences (NC-HD), reduced activation in the HD group relative to NC was observed in the right middle frontal, left middle occipital, left precuneus, and  left middle frontal gyri. The variable striatal activity in the Huntington's group suggests early functional loss possibly associated with previously demonstrated early atrophy of these same neural structures.
15246452	12	n = 12
15275902	8	n = 8	Human swallowing represents a complex highly coordinated sensorimotor function whose functional neuroanatomy remains incompletely understood. Specifically, previous studies have failed to delineate the temporo-spatial sequence of those cerebral loci active during the differing phases of swallowing. We therefore sought to define the temporal characteristics of cortical activity associated with human swallowing behaviour using a novel application of magnetoencephalography (MEG). In healthy volunteers (n = 8, aged 28-45), 151-channel whole cortex MEG was recorded during the conditions of oral water infusion, volitional wet swallowing (5 ml bolus), tongue thrust or rest. Each condition lasted for 5 s and was repeated 20 times. Synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM) analysis was performed on each active epoch and compared to rest. Temporal sequencing of brain activations utilised time-frequency wavelet plots of regions selected using virtual electrodes. Following SAM analysis, water infusion preferentially activated the caudolateral sensorimotor cortex, whereas during volitional swallowing and tongue movement, the superior sensorimotor cortex was more strongly active. Time-frequency wavelet analysis indicated that sensory input from the tongue simultaneously activated caudolateral sensorimotor  and primary gustatory cortex, which appeared to prime the superior sensory and motor cortical areas, involved in the volitional phase of swallowing. Our data support the existence of a temporal synchrony across the whole cortical swallowing network, with sensory input from the tongue being critical. Thus, the  ability to non-invasively image this network, with intra-individual and high temporal resolution, provides new insights into the brain processing of human swallowing.
15295012	22	n = 22	Functional neuroimaging studies have revealed human brain regions, notably in the fusiform gyrus, that respond selectively to images of faces as opposed to other kinds of objects. Here we use fMRI to show that the mid-fusiform gyrus responds with nearly the same level of selectivity to images of human bodies without faces, relative to tools and scenes. In a group-average analysis (n = 22), the fusiform activations identified by contrasting faces versus tools and bodies versus tools are very similar. Analyses of within-subjects regions of interest, however, show that the peaks of the two activations occupy close but distinct locations. In a second experiment, we find that the body-selective fusiform region, but not the face-selective region, responds more to stick figure depictions of bodies than to scrambled controls. This result further distinguishes the two foci and confirms that the body-selective response generalizes to abstract image formats. These results challenge accounts of the mid-fusiform gyrus that focus solely on faces and suggest that this region contains multiple distinct category-selective neural representations.
15325390	47	n = 47	Total brain volume accounts for about 16% of the variance in general intelligence scores (IQ), but how volumes of specific regions-of-interest (ROIs) relate to IQ  is not known. We used voxel-based morphometry (VBM) in two independent samples to identify substantial gray matter (GM) correlates of IQ. Based on statistical conjunction of both samples (N = 47; P < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons), more gray matter is associated with higher IQ in discrete Brodmann  areas (BA) including frontal (BA 10, 46, 9), temporal (BA 21, 37, 22, 42), parietal (BA 43 and 3), and occipital (BA 19) lobes and near BA 39 for white matter (WM). These results underscore the distributed neural basis of intelligence and suggest a developmental course for volume--IQ relationships in adulthood.
15381748	15	n = 15	Learning a motor skill is associated with changes in patterns of brain activation with movement. Here we have further characterized these dynamics during fast (short-term) learning of a visuomotor skill using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Subjects (n = 15) were studied as they learned to visually track a moving target by varying the isometric force applied to a pressure plate held in  the right hand. Learning was confirmed by demonstration of improved performance and automaticity (the relative lack of need for conscious attention during task execution). We identified two distinct, time-dependent patterns of functional changes in the brain associated with these behavioral changes. An initial, more attentionally demanding stage of learning was associated with the greatest relative activity in widely distributed, predominantly cortical regions including prefrontal, bilateral sensorimotor, and parietal cortices. The caudate nucleus and ipsilateral cerebellar hemisphere also showed significant activity. Over time, as performance improved, activity in these regions progressively decreased. There was an increase in activity in subcortical motor regions including that of  the cerebellar dentate and the thalamus and putamen. Short-term motor-skill learning thus is associated with a progressive reduction of widely distributed activations in cortical regions responsible for executive functions, processing somatosensory feedback and motor planning. The results suggest that early performance gains rely strongly on prefrontal-caudate interactions with later increased activity in a subcortical circuit involving the cerebellum and basal ganglia as the task becomes more automatic. Characterization of these changes provides a potential tool for functional "dissection" of pathologies of movement  and motor learning.
15543553	9	n = 9	We sought to determine the influence of tissue damage and the potential impact of cortical reorganization on the performance to the Paced Auditory Serial Addition  Test (PASAT) in patients at the earliest stage of multiple sclerosis (MS). Magnetization transfer ratio (MTR) imaging and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments using PASAT as paradigm were carried out in 18 patients with clinically isolated syndrome suggestive of MS (CISSMS) compared to  18 controls. MTR histogram analyses showed structural abnormalities in patients involving the normal-appearing white matter (NAWM) but also the gray matter (GM). Mean PASAT scores were significantly lower in the group of patients taken as a whole, and were correlated with the mean NAWM MTR value. No correlation was observed between PASAT scores and GM MTR. However, in the subgroup of patients with normal PASAT performance (n = 9), fMRI showed larger activations in bilateral Brodmann area 45 (BA45) and right BA44 compared to that in controls (n  = 18). In these areas with potentially compensatory reorganization, the whole group of patients (n = 18) showed significantly greater activation than controls  (n = 18). Activation in the right BA45 was inversely correlated with the mean NAWM MTR and the peak position of GM MTR histograms of patients. This study indicates that even at the earliest stage of MS, cortical reorganization is present inside the executive system of working memory and could tend to limit the determinant functional impact of NAWM injury on the execution of the PASAT.
15543553	18	n = 18
15543553	18	n = 18
15543553	18	n = 18
15734344	28	n = 28	Raloxifene is a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) that is prescribed in females only, but its use in male subjects is increasingly considered. With a  growing number of patients having potential benefit from raloxifene, the need for an assessment of its effects on brain function is growing. Effects of estrogens on brain function are very subtle and difficult to detect by neuropsychological assessment. Functional imaging techniques, however, have been relatively successful in detecting such changes. This study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine effects of raloxifene treatment on memory function. Healthy elderly males (n = 28; mean age 63.6 years, SD 2.4) were scanned during performance on a face encoding paradigm. Scans were made at baseline and after 3 months of treatment with either raloxifene (n = 14) or placebo (n = 14). Treatment effects were analyzed using mixed-effects statistical analysis (FSL). Activation during task performance involved bilateral parietal and prefrontal areas, anterior cingulate gyrus, and inferior prefrontal, occipital, and mediotemporal areas bilaterally. When compared to placebo, raloxifene treatment significantly enhanced activation in these structures (Z > 3.1), except for mediotemporal areas. Task performance accuracy diminished in the placebo group (P = 0.02), but remained constant in the raloxifene group (P = 0.60). In conclusion, raloxifene treatment enhanced brain activation in areas spanning a number of different cognitive domains, suggesting an effect on cortical arousal. Such effects may translate into small effects on behavior, including effects on attention and working memory performance, executive functions, verbal skills, and episodic memory. Further neuropsychological assessment is necessary to test the validity of these predictions.
15734344	14	n = 14
15734344	14	n = 14
15734349	15	n = 15	Arterial spin labeling (ASL) perfusion functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is an attractive alternative to BOLD fMRI. Nevertheless, current ASL fMRI  techniques are limited by several factors that hamper more routine applications in humans. One of these factors is restricted brain coverage so that whole-brain  ASL fMRI studies have never been reported. The present study tested the ability of a multislice continuous ASL (CASL) fMRI approach using a small surface coil placed on the subject's neck to map changes in regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) throughout the brain while healthy individuals (N = 15) performed memory-guided sequential finger movements at a mean rate of approximately 0.5 Hz. As predicted by results from a large number of studies, reliable task-related increases in flow were detected across subjects not only in primary and associative cortical areas but also in subcortical brain regions. When normalized to baseline, rCBF increased 31% in the hand representation area (HRA) of left primary motor cortex (M1), 13% in the left supplementary motor area proper (SMA), 10% in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), 10-18% in the bilateral intraparietal sulci, 6% in the HRA of left putamen, 10% in the left thalamus, and 17% in the right anterior cerebellum. In addition to these increases, 6% and 4% decreases in rCBF were detected in the HRA of the right M1 and the bilateral posterior cingulate sulci, respectively. These results demonstrate that perfusion-based fMRI using CASL with a separate labeling coil can now be used to  characterize task-related flow changes in most of the brain volume with adequate  accuracy and sensitivity.
15734360	11	n = 11	Anatomical and functional MRI images were acquired in a group of healthy elderly  subjects (n = 11) and a group of patients diagnosed with probable Alzheimer's disease, from mild to moderate severity (n = 8). During functional sessions, verbal episodic Encoding and Recognition tasks were presented to subjects. Both groups were compared in terms of gray matter volume and cerebral activation. Furthermore, in the AD group, correlations between hippocampal gray matter volume and whole-brain activations were examined. When compared to healthy controls, AD  patients presented significant gray matter atrophy as well as reduced activations during Encoding and Recognition in the medial temporal lobes and inferior parietal/superior temporal associative areas. In the same regions, the fMRI activity elicited by the Recognition task was positively correlated with hippocampal gray matter volume. Moreover, an increase of left prefrontal activity during Encoding and Recognition was observed in AD patients relative to controls  and was correlated with memory performance. This additional activity elicited by  episodic memory processes was not found to correlate with the degree of medial temporal atrophy in our group of patients. Our study shows that function in brain regions critical to episodic memory is altered in AD. During episodic Recognition, these functional changes may closely correlate with the progressive  structural changes observed in the hippocampal region.
15734360	8	n = 8
15737657	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults is an increasingly recognized psychiatric disorder, linked with impairments in numerous life domains and with neurocognitive dysfunctions. However, the neural substrate  of cognitive functioning in adults with this disorder has been relatively unexamined. The objective of this study was to examine neural functioning in ADHD adults during performance on a verbal working memory task. METHODS: A sample of unmedicated adults with ADHD (n = 20) and control subjects (n = 20) performed a 2-back task of working memory, and the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) response was used as a measure of neural activity during working memory performance. RESULTS: Though working memory performance did not differ significantly between ADHD adults and control subjects, ADHD adults showed significantly decreased activity in cerebellar and occipital regions and a trend toward decreased activation in an a priori predicted region of the prefrontal cortex. CONCLUSIONS: ADHD adults showed altered patterns of neural activity despite comparable performance on a verbal working memory task. These findings suggest that the cerebellum is involved in the pathophysiology of at least some cognitive deficits associated with ADHD and  emphasize the need for additional research aimed at elucidating the role of the cerebellum in ADHD symptomatology.
15737657	20	n = 20
15758039	9	n = 9	Impairments in using eye gaze to establish joint attention and to comprehend the  mental states and intentions of other people are striking features of autism. Here, using event-related functional MRI (fMRI), we show that in autism, brain regions involved in gaze processing, including the superior temporal sulcus (STS) region, are not sensitive to intentions conveyed by observed gaze shifts. On congruent trials, subjects watched as a virtual actor looked towards a checkerboard that appeared in her visual field, confirming the subject's expectation regarding what the actor 'ought to do' in this context. On incongruent trials, she looked towards empty space, violating the subject's expectation. Consistent with a prior report from our laboratory that used this task in neurologically normal subjects, 'errors' (incongruent trials) evoked more activity in the STS and other brain regions linked to social cognition, indicating a strong effect of intention in typically developing subjects (n = 9). The same brain regions were activated during observation of gaze shifts in subjects with autism (n = 10), but did not differentiate congruent and incongruent trials, indicating that activity in these regions was not modulated by the context of the perceived gaze shift. These results demonstrate a difference in the response of brain regions underlying eye gaze processing in autism. We conclude that lack of modulation of the STS region by gaze shifts that convey different intentions contributes to the eye gaze processing deficits associated with autism.
15758039	10	n = 10
15766634	18	n = 18	Functional imaging and neuropsychological data suggest that interconnected brain  structures including the orbito-frontal cortex (OFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and caudate nucleus (CN) are involved in the pathophysiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), but structural imaging studies investigating these regions have yielded inconclusive results. This may be due to inconsistencies in the identification of anatomical boundaries and methodologies  utilised (i.e. automated vs. manual tracing). This magnetic resonance imaging study used manual tracing to measure volumes of selected brain regions (OFC, ACC  and CN) in OCD patients and compared them with samples of healthy (HC) and psychiatric (schizophrenia; SCZ) controls (n=18 in each group). Concurrently, automated voxel-based analysis was also used to detect subtle differences in cerebral grey and white matter. For the OCD vs. HC comparison, there were no significant volumetric differences detected using the manual or the automated method (although the latter revealed a deficit in the subcortical white matter of the right temporal region). A direct comparison of the two patient groups showed  no significant differences using the manual method. However, a moderate effect size was detected for OFC grey matter (reduced in SCZ), which was supported by findings of reduced OFC volume in the automated analysis. Automated analyses also showed reduced volumes in the dorsal (white matter) and ventral ACC (grey and white matter), as well as the left posterior cingulate (grey and white matter) in SCZ. The findings suggest that in contrast to findings in SCZ, there are very few (if any) gross structural anomalies in OCD.
15769488	17	n = 17	It is widely assumed that episodic retrieval (recollection) involves reinstatement of cortical activity engaged during the processing of an episode when it was initially experienced. It follows from this assumption that the cortical correlates of recollection should differ with the content of what is recollected, and that retrieval of different content should be associated with activity in functionally distinct cortical regions. The present experiment investigated these predictions. Subjects (N=17) studied a mixed list of words and pictures and were then presented with a test list comprised of words only. Test items were studied words, the names of studied pictures, and unstudied (new) words. Functional magnetic resonance images were acquired while the subjects made Remember/Know/New judgments to these test words. Independent of study material, studied items endorsed as Remembered elicited greater activity than correctly classified unstudied items in several regions, including left frontal, left lateral parietal, and posterior cingulate cortex. In addition, Remembered items elicited greater activity in the right hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus than items accorded Know judgments, replicating previous findings. Analysis of content-specific effects demonstrated a regional double-dissociation within left  fusiform cortex; recollected words elicited greater activity than recollected pictures in lateral fusiform, whereas the reverse effect was evident in an anterior fusiform region. The lateral and anterior fusiform areas correspond closely to areas held to be functionally specialized for the processing of visual words and pictures, respectively. Thus, the current findings support the cortical reinstatement hypothesis of episodic retrieval.
15808990	100	n = 100	Recent hemodynamic imaging studies have shown that processing of low probability  task-relevant target stimuli (i.e., oddballs) and low probability task-irrelevant novel stimuli elicit widespread activity in diverse, spatially distributed cortical and subcortical systems. The nature of this distributed response supports the model that processing of salient and novel stimuli engages many brain regions regardless of whether said regions were necessary for task performance. However, these latter neuroimaging studies largely employed small sample sizes and fixed-effect analyses, limiting the characterization and inference of the results. The present study addressed these issues by collecting  a large sample size (n = 100) and employed random effects statistical models. Analyses were also conducted to determine the inter-subject reliability of the hemodynamic response and the effects of gender and age on target detection and novelty processing. Group data demonstrated highly significant activation in all  34 specified regions of interest for target detection and all 24 specified regions of interest for processing of novel stimuli. Neither age nor gender systematically influenced the results. These data are discussed within the context of a model that proposes that the mammalian brain has evolved to adopt a  strategy of engaging distributed neuronal systems when processing salient stimuli despite the low probability that many of these brain regions are required for successful task performance. This process may be termed 'adaptive reflexive processing.' The implications of these results for interpreting functional MRI studies are discussed.
15820711	4	n = 4	BACKGROUND: Functional neuroimaging studies have implicated hyperactivity of the  frontal cortex in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD); however, relationships between abnormal brain activity, clinical improvement, and neuropsychological function have not been clarified in OCD. To clarify the pathophysiology of this disorder, regional changes in brain function were examined during administration  of cognitive and symptom provocation tasks in patients with OCD before and after  treatment. METHODS: Ten outpatients with OCD participated in the study. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was performed before and after treatment. Stroop and symptom provocation tasks were administered during fMRI. Each patient was randomly allocated to receive either pharmacotherapy with fluvoxamine 200 mg/day (n = 4) or behavior therapy (n = 6) for 12 weeks. RESULTS: After 12-week treatment, mean (+/- SD) total score on the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale decreased from 29.00 +/- 3.59 to 14.60 +/- 9.22, representing symptomatic improvement from moderate to mild. After symptom improvement, symptom provocation-related activation in the orbitofrontal, dorsolateral-prefrontal, and anterior cingulate cortices decreased. Conversely, Stroop task-related activation in the parietal cortex and cerebellum increased. CONCLUSIONS: After improvement of OCD with either fluvoxamine or behavioral therapy, hyperactivation of the frontal lobe related to a symptom-provocative state decreases, and posterior brain activity related to action-monitoring function increases.
15820711	6	n = 6
15850737	27	n = 27	Allelic variants in the promoter region of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene have been implicated in several psychiatric disorders and personality traits. In  particular, two common alleles in a variable repeat sequence of the promoter region (SLC6A4) have been differentially associated with a display of abnormal levels of anxiety and affective illness in individuals carrying the "s" allele. The aim of this study was to compare the basal cerebral metabolic activity of non-psychiatric subjects in fronto-limbic structures to determine whether differences exist in basal metabolic activity within this functional polymorphism. PET scans with fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose as radiotracer were performed in 71 non-psychiatric subjects previously screened for psychopathology  and subsequently genotyped for SLC6A4; PET images were compared with SPM2 according to s/s (n = 27), s/l (n = 25), and l/l (n = 19) groups considering a significance threshold in a priori selected areas of P < 0.001 and an extent threshold > or =5 voxels. The analysis showed an effect of interest among the three genotype groups in right anterior cingulate gyrus (ACC), left middle frontal gyrus, and left posterior cingulate gyrus (PCC). Comparison between l/l vs. s/s showed increased metabolism for l/l in left middle frontal gyrus and an increase for s/s in right ACC and left PCC. Comparison between s/s vs. s/l showed an increase for s/s in left PCC and right ACC. Increased basal metabolism in fronto-limbic structures for the s/s group may be conceived as an "overactive metabolic state" of these structures, possibly related to an increased susceptibility for developing an anxiety-depression spectrum disorder.
15850737	25	n = 25
15850737	19	n = 19
15860342	16	n = 16	BACKGROUND: In healthy individuals, the activity of the medial temporal lobe habituates rapidly with the repeated presentation of a stimulus. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we tested the hypothesis that habituation of the medial temporal lobe is reduced in schizophrenia. METHODS: During fMRI scanning, fearful and happy faces were presented repeatedly to healthy control subjects (n =16) and patients with schizophrenia (n =18). Habituation of medial temporal lobe structures was measured by comparing the hemodynamic response occurring during the early and late portions of the presentation of each face. RESULTS: Control subjects demonstrated significant medial temporal lobe habituation to fearful but not to happy faces. In contrast, patients with schizophrenia did not demonstrate medial temporal lobe habituation in response to fearful or happy faces. In a direct, between-group comparison, right hippocampal  habituation to fearful faces was significantly greater in control subjects than in the schizophrenia patients. Also, there were no significant differences between the patients and control subjects in the early medial temporal lobe response to fearful faces, suggesting that attenuated hippocampal habituation in  schizophrenia is not associated with a reduction in initial activation. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that there is abnormal modulation of hippocampal responses to fearful faces in schizophrenia.
15860342	18	n = 18
15949653	9	n = 9	Patients with schizophrenia frequently demonstrate hypofrontality in tasks that require executive processing; however questions still remain as to whether prefrontal cortex dysfunctions are specific to schizophrenia, or a general feature of major psychopathology. Context processing is conceptualized as an executive function associated with attention and working memory processes. Impairment in the ability of patients with schizophrenia to represent and maintain context information has been previously reported in a number of studies. To examine the question of the specificity of a context processing deficit to schizophrenia, we used functional MRI and an expectancy AX continuous performance task designed to assess context processing in a group of healthy controls (n=9),  depressed patient controls (n=10), and patients with schizophrenia (n=7). The behavioral performance was consistent with a context processing deficit in patients with schizophrenia, but not those with depression. The imaging data replicate previous results in showing abnormal activity in the right middle frontal gyrus (BA9) in schizophrenia patients related to context processing.
15949653	10	n = 10
15949653	7	n = 7
15949654	46	n = 46	BACKGROUND: Abnormal temporal connections with other cortical areas may underlie  some of the most prominent cognitive deficits described in schizophrenia. In order to evaluate the relationship between temporal and other cortical regions in schizophrenia, we examined the intercorrelations of volumetric measures of gray and white matter for each Brodmann's area of the temporal lobe with volumes in the rest of the cortex in patients with schizophrenia and normal comparison subjects. METHODS: MR images were acquired in normal subjects (n=46) and patients with schizophrenia (n=106), divided into good-outcome (n=52) and poor-outcome (Kraepelinian; n=54) subtypes; and correlational patterns between the volumes of  individual Brodmann's areas were compared and examined in relation to outcome. RESULTS: Positive frontotemporal intercorrelations were significantly stronger while negative frontotemporal intercorrelations were weaker in schizophrenia patients as compared to normal subjects. Correlations between the right temporal  pole and other temporal regions were significantly weaker in schizophrenia patients than in controls. When compared to normal controls and good-outcome patients, schizophrenia patients with poor outcomes showed a selective pattern of stronger gray matter correlations between the medial temporal vs. primary visual  and between primary auditory vs. dorsolateral prefrontal cortices, all in the left hemisphere. CONCLUSIONS: Strengthening of positive associations among the temporal and extratemporal (mainly frontal and occipital) regions as well as weakening of regional intercorrelations within the temporal lobe in patients appear to constitute the major differences of correlational patterns in schizophrenia patients and normal subjects. Present findings may be implicated in object recognition deficits seen in patients with schizophrenia, as well as in purportedly deficient spatial and semantic processing of both auditory and visual information that may be associated with poor outcome.
15949654	106	n = 106
15949654	52	n = 52
15949654	54	n = 54
15953488	14	n = 14	BACKGROUND: In the brain, processing of fearful stimuli engages the amygdala, and the variability of its activity is associated with genetic factors as well as with emotional salience. The objective of this study was to explore the relevance of personality style for variability of amygdala response. METHODS: We studied two groups (n=14 in each group) of healthy subjects categorized by contrasting cognitive styles with which they attribute salience to fearful stimuli: so-called phobic prone subjects who exaggerate potential environmental threat versus so-called eating disorders prone subjects who tend to be much less centered around fear. The two groups underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) at 3T during performance of a perceptual task of threatening stimuli and they were also matched for the genotype of the 5' variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in the serotonin transporter. RESULTS: The fMRI results indicated that phobic prone subjects selectively recruit the amygdala to a larger extent than eating disorders prone subjects. Activity in the amygdala was also independently predicted by personality style and genotype of the serotonin transporter. Moreover, brain activity during a working memory task did not differentiate the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study suggest that aspects of personality style are rooted in biological responses of the fear circuitry associated with processing of environmental information.
15955502	12	n = 12	While there are many reports of reduced amplitude of hemodynamic responses in schizophrenia, there are no reports of delayed hemodynamic responses, in spite of event-related brain potential (ERP) evidence of slowed neural responses. Recently, Henson et al. (2002) [Henson, R., Price, C., Rugg, M., Turner, R., Friston, K., 2002. Detecting latency differences in event-related BOLD responses: application to words versus nonwords and initial versus repeated face presentations. NeuroImage, 15:83-97] proposed a new method for testing small latency effects (<2 s) in hemodynamic responses. fMRI data were collected during  a visual oddball task with infrequent (12%) targets (K) and frequent (88%) standards (X), presented every 1-3 s pseudorandomly, with 7-24 s between targets. SPM99 yielded parameter estimates for the hemodynamic response and its temporal derivative (TD). Beta images reflecting hemodynamic response magnitude to target  stimuli were minimally thresholded (P < 0.05, uncorrected), and latencies were estimated for surviving voxels using TD and hemodynamic response beta values. DSM-IV schizophrenia patients (n = 12) and sex- and age-matched healthy control subjects (n = 12) were recruited from the community. Although groups differed only minimally in activation height, hemodynamic responses were significantly delayed in basal ganglia, thalamus, and anterior cingulate in patients with schizophrenia. Psychomotor slowing reflected in reaction times to targets recorded outside the magnet was related to hemodynamic slowing in basal ganglia,  anterior cingulate, thalamus, as well as left cerebellum in controls. Delays in the hemodynamic response have far-reaching implications for understanding the pathophysiology of schizophrenia from slowed neural responses to slowed substrate delivery, and depending of the degree of delay, may raise methodological issues regarding modeling hemodynamic responses in patients and controls.
15955502	12	n = 12
15990338	42	n = 42	BACKGROUND: Abnormal regional volume intercorrelations between selected cortical  areas in schizophrenia patients were previously reported in several MRI studies.  METHODS: A detailed analysis of frontal gray and white matter volume correlations with Brodmann's area volumes in the rest of the cortex was undertaken in normal subjects (n = 42) and patients with schizophrenia (n = 106), divided into good-outcome (n = 52) and poor-outcome (Kraepelinian; n = 54) subtypes. RESULTS:  Frontal gray matter volumes were correlated with temporal lobe volumes in schizophrenics but not in normal subjects. Some frontal-parietal and frontal-occipital correlations showed a similar pattern. In comparison to normal  subjects, schizophrenia patients showed weaker or absent intercorrelations intrafrontally, specifically between left motor-premotor and eye-movement areas (4, 6, 8) and dorsolateral area 44, as well as between left areas 9 and 46 vs. area 24 (cingulate gyrus). Poor outcome among patients with schizophrenia was associated with weaker correlations between left frontal area 9 and both medial and lateral temporal cortices, as compared to normal subjects or good-outcome patients. CONCLUSIONS: There appears to be a structural component in the task or  symptom-related dysfunctional interactions between the frontal and more posterior cortical regions with preferential pathological involvement of frontotemporal and more limited involvement of frontoparietal and fronto-occipital systems in schizophrenia. Impaired regional associations within the frontal lobe, between left motor-premotor and Broca's areas, may play a role in language processing deficits in schizophrenia, while frontocingulate disconnection may result in working memory disturbances. Poor outcome may be associated with more widespread  disconnections between prefrontal vs. cingulate and temporal regions in the left  hemisphere, consistent with a disruption along the course of the left cingulum or uncinate bundles.
15990338	106	n = 106
15990338	52	n = 52
15990338	54	n = 54
15993859	12	n = 12	BACKGROUND: The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) is a region implicated in  the assessment of the rewarding potential of stimuli and may be dysfunctional in  major depressive disorder (MDD). The few studies examining prefrontal cortical responses to emotive stimuli in MDD have indicated increased VMPFC responses to pleasant images but decreased responses to sad mood provocation when compared with healthy individuals. We wished to corroborate these results by examining neural responses to personally relevant happy and sad stimuli in MDD and healthy  individuals within the same paradigm. METHODS: Neural responses to happy and sad  emotional stimuli (autobiographical memory prompts and congruent facial expressions) were measured using blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in MDD (n = 12) and healthy (n = 12) individuals. RESULTS: Increased and decreased responses in VMPFC were observed in MDD and healthy individuals, respectively, to happy stimuli, whereas the pattern  was reversed for MDD and healthy individual responses to sad stimuli. These findings were not explained by medication effects in depressed individuals. CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate a double dissociation of the pattern of VMPFC response to happy and sad stimuli in depressed and healthy individuals and  suggest abnormal reward processing in MDD.
15993859	12	n = 12
16000636	26	n = 26	Converging evidence in neurophysiological and neuroimaging studies has suggested  that the limbic and prefrontal systems play important roles in emotion and cognition. These structures are activated when we see a human face, assuming that we automatically evaluate the biological significance of the stimuli. The serotonin (5-HT) system within the brain has been tied to various behaviors such  as mood and anxiety and to the biology of neuropsychiatric disorders. To investigate the link between the 5-HT system and limbic/prefrontal activity, normal subjects (n = 26) who underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging and  faced recognition tasks were genotyped for the single nucleotide polymorphism C178T in the regulatory region of the serotonin receptor type 3 gene (HTR3A). We  found that the subjects with C/C alleles had greater activity in the amygdala and dorsal and medial prefrontal cortices than those with C/T alleles. The C/C group  also showed a faster reaction time during the task than the C/T group. The temperamental predisposition of the subjects had a significant correlation with brain activity in the C/C group. The genotype effect in the right amygdala and prefrontal cortex was largest during the first run of the experiment. These results indicate that the C178T variation in the HTR3A has a critical influence on the amygdaloid activity and on human face processing, probably through regulation of the receptor expression. The present study may contribute to elucidating a possible link among genes, the brain, and behavior in normal populations and may help reveal the biological basis of neuropsychiatric disorders.
16038681	14	n = 14	BACKGROUND: Neuroimaging studies report reduced medial prefrontal cortical (particularly anterior cingulate) but enhanced amygdala response to fear signals  in posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). We investigated whether anterior cingulate-amygdala dysregulation in PTSD would generalize to salient, but nonthreat related signals. METHODS: Individuals with PTSD (n = 14) and age and sex-matched nontraumatized controls (n = 14) completed an auditory oddball paradigm adapted to functional magnetic resonance imaging at a 1.5-T field strength. RESULTS: Controls displayed bilateral activation in ventral anterior cingulate and amygdala networks, and PTSD subjects showed bilateral dorsal anterior cingulate and amygdala activation to targets relative to nontargets. Compared to controls, PTSD subjects showed enhanced responses to targets in the dorsal and rostral anterior cingulate, and left amygdala. Whole-brain analyses confirmed the expected pattern of distributed prefrontal-parietal responses to targets in the oddball task. Greater activity in posterior parietal somatosensory regions was observed in PTSD. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings of enhanced anterior cingulate responses in PTSD contrast with reports of reduced activity for threat  stimuli, suggesting that the latter may be specific to processing of threat-related content. Activation in rostral and dorsal anterior cingulate, left amygdala and posterior parietal networks in response to salient, nonthreatening stimuli may reflect generalized hypervigilance.
16038681	14	n = 14
16046149	54	n = 54	This experiment used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare functional neuroanatomy associated with executed and imagined hand movements in novel and skilled learning phases. We hypothesized that 1 week of intensive physical practice would strengthen the motor representation of a hand motor sequence and increase the similarity of functional neuroanatomy associated with executed and imagined hand movements. During fMRI scanning, a right-hand self-paced button press sequence was executed and imagined before (NOVEL) and after (SKILLED) 1 week of intensive physical practice (n = 54; right-hand dominant). The mean execution rate was significantly faster in the SKILLED (3.8 Hz) than the NOVEL condition (2.5 Hz) (P < 0.001), but there was no difference in execution errors. Activation foci associated with execution and imagery was congruent in both the NOVEL and SKILLED conditions, though activation features were more similar in the SKILLED versus NOVEL phase. In the NOVEL phase, activations were more extensive during execution than imagery in primary and secondary cortical motor volumes and the cerebellum, while during imagery activations were greater in the striatum. In the SKILLED phase, activation features within these same volumes became increasingly similar for execution and  imagery, though imagery more heavily activated premotor areas, inferior parietal  lobe, and medial temporal lobe, while execution more heavily activated the precentral/postcentral gyri, striatum, and cerebellum. This experiment demonstrated congruent activation of the cortical and subcortical motor system during both novel and skilled learning phases, supporting the effectiveness of motor imagery-based mental practice techniques for both the acquisition of new skills and the rehearsal of skilled movements.
16051437	7	n = 7	The neural coding of perception can differ from that for the physical attributes  of a stimulus. Recent studies suggest that activity in right anterior insular cortex may underlie thermal perception, particularly that of cold. We now examine whether this region is also important for the perception of warmth. We applied cutaneous warm stimuli on the left leg (warmth) in normal subjects (n = 7) during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). After each stimulus, subjects rated their subjective intensity of the stimulus using a visual analogue scale (VAS), and correlations were determined between the fMRI signal and the VAS ratings. We  found that intensity ratings of warmth correlated with the fMRI signal in the right (contralateral to stimulation) anterior insular cortex. These results, in conjunction with previous reports, suggest that the right anterior insular cortex is important for different types of thermal perception.
16084839	10	n = 10	BACKGROUND: There has been increasing interest in the role of immunologic processes, notably cytokines, in the development of behavioral alterations, especially in medically ill patients. Interferon (IFN)-alpha is notorious for causing behavioral symptoms, including depression, fatigue, and cognitive dysfunction, and has been used to investigate the effects of cytokines on the brain. METHODS: In the present study we assessed the effects of low-dose IFN-alpha on brain activity, using functional magnetic resonance imaging during a task of visuospatial attention in patients infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). RESULTS: Despite endorsing symptoms of impaired concentration and fatigue, IFN-alpha-treated patients (n = 10) exhibited task performance and activation of  parietal and occipital brain regions similar to that seen in HCV-infected control subjects (n = 11). Interestingly, however, in contrast to control subjects, IFN-alpha-treated patients exhibited significant activation in the dorsal part of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), which highly correlated with the number of task-related errors. No such correlation was found in control subjects. CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with the role of the ACC in conflict monitoring, ACC activation during IFN-alpha administration suggests that cytokines might increase processing conflict or reduce the threshold for conflict detection, thereby signaling the need to exert greater mental effort to maintain performance. Such alterations in ACC activity might in turn contribute to cytokine-induced behavioral changes.
16084839	11	n = 11
16111898	9	n = 9	In synesthesia, stimulation of one sensory modality (e.g., hearing) triggers a percept in another, non-stimulated sensory modality (e.g., vision). Likewise, perception of a form (e.g., a letter) may induce a color percept (i.e., grapheme-color synesthesia). To date, the neural mechanisms underlying synesthesia remain to be elucidated. We disclosed by fMRI, while controlling for  surface color processing, enhanced activity in the left intraparietal cortex during the experience of grapheme-color synesthesia (n = 9). In contrast, the perception of surface color per se activated the color centers in the fusiform gyrus bilaterally. The data support theoretical accounts that grapheme-color synesthesia may originate from enhanced cross-modal binding of form and color. A  mismatch of surface color and grapheme induced synesthetically felt color additionally activated the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). This suggests that cognitive control processes become active to resolve the perceptual conflict resulting from synesthesia.
16122946	18	n = 18	General intelligence (g) is a common factor in diverse cognitive abilities and a  major influence on life outcomes. Neuroimaging studies in adults suggest that the lateral prefrontal and parietal cortices play a crucial role in related cognitive activities including fluid reasoning, the control of attention, and working memory. Here, we investigated the neural bases for intellectual giftedness (superior-g) in adolescents, using fMRI. The participants consisted of a superior-g group (n = 18, mean RAPM = 33.9 +/- 0.8, >99%) from the national academy for gifted adolescents and the control group (n = 18, mean RAPM = 22.8 +/- 1.6, 60%) from local high schools in Korea (mean age = 16.5 +/- 0.8). fMRI data were acquired while they performed two reasoning tasks with high and low g-loadings. In both groups, the high g-loaded tasks specifically increased regional activity in the bilateral fronto-parietal network including the lateral  prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and posterior parietal cortices. However, the regional activations of the superior-g group were significantly stronger than those of the control group, especially in the posterior parietal cortex. Moreover, regression analysis revealed that activity of the superior and intraparietal cortices (BA 7/40) strongly covaried with individual differences in g (r = 0.71 to 0.81). A correlated vectors analysis implicated bilateral posterior parietal areas in g. These results suggest that superior-g may not be due to the recruitment of additional brain regions but to the functional facilitation of the fronto-parietal network particularly driven by the posterior  parietal activation.
16122946	18	n = 18
16126414	28	n = 28	Different activation loci have been reported for language processing in unilingual Chinese and unilingual English participants, as well as in bilingual readers of English and French, two alphabetic languages. Nevertheless, the extant imaging work on Mandarin-English bilinguals favors common neural substrates for English and Chinese, languages with contrasting oral and written forms. We investigated the phonological processes in reading for English-Chinese biscriptals using a homophone matching task with parallel behavioral (n = 28) and fMRI (n = 6) experiments. Unlike previous reports, we observed distinct regions of activation for Mandarin in the left and right frontal lobes, the left temporal lobe, and the right occipital lobe, plus distinct regions of activation for English bilaterally in both the frontal and parietal lobes. The implications of these novel findings are discussed with reference to language representation in bilinguals.
16126414	6	n = 6
16183659	12	n = 12	It is not known whether there is a core abnormality that occurs in all cases of schizophrenia. The cognitive dysmetria hypothesis proposes that there is such an  abnormality which is characterized cognitively by a disruption in control and coordination processes, and functionally by abnormal inter-regional connectivity  within the cortico-cerebellar-thalamo-cortical circuit (CCTCC). In the current study, we used functional MRI (fMRI) to investigate these two key aspects of the  hypothesis. Since patients with schizophrenia show deficits in attention which have been characterized extensively using the continuous performance task (CPT) and since functional imaging studies have also demonstrated that this task engages the CCTCC, we used this task to investigate whether two patient groups with distinct symptom profiles would show functional dysconnectivity within this  network. Three groups of subjects participated in the study: healthy volunteers (n = 12), schizophrenia patients with both negative and positive symptoms (n = 11) and schizophrenia patients with primarily positive symptoms (n = 11). Patient groups were matched for age of illness onset and medication, and to the control group for age, gender and handedness. Subjects were scanned using fMRI whilst they performed a modified version of the CPT, involving both degraded and non-degraded stimuli. Stimulus degradation has been shown to produce decrements in sensitivity, which is thought to reflect increased demands on the limited capacity of visual attention. Between-group comparisons revealed that patients with schizophrenia, irrespective of symptomatology, showed attenuation of the anterior cingulate and cerebellar response to stimulus degradation in comparison  with control subjects. We also observed disruptions of inter-regional brain integration in schizophrenia. A task-specific relationship between the medial superior frontal gyrus and both anterior cingulate and the cerebellum was disrupted in both patient groups in comparison with controls. In addition, patients with negative symptoms showed impaired behavioural performance, and abnormal task-related connectivity between anterior cingulate and supplementary motor area. These findings are consistent with theoretical accounts of schizophrenia as a disorder of functional integration, and with the cognitive dysmetria hypothesis, which posits a disconnection within the CCTCC as a fundamental abnormality in schizophrenia, independent of diagnostic subtype. Furthermore, these data show evidence of additional functional deficits in patients with negative symptoms, deficits which may explain the accompanying attentional impairment.
16183659	11	n = 11
16183659	11	n = 11
16185668	30	n = 30	BACKGROUND: The ability to accurately detect deception is presently very limited. Detecting deception might be more accurately achieved by measuring the brain correlates of lying in an individual. In addition, a method to investigate the neurocircuitry of deception might provide a unique opportunity to test the neurocircuitry of persons in whom deception is a prominent component (i.e., conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder, etc.). METHODS: In this study, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to show that specific regions were reproducibly activated when subjects deceived. Subjects participated in a mock crime stealing either a ring or a watch. While undergoing an fMRI, the  subjects denied taking either object, thus telling the truth with some responses, and lying with others. A Model-Building Group (MBG, n = 30) was used to develop the analysis methods, and the methods were subsequently applied to an independent Model-Testing Group (MTG, n = 31). RESULTS: We were able to correctly differentiate truthful from deceptive responses, correctly identifying the object stolen, for 93% of the subjects in the MBG and 90% of the subjects in the MTG. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to use fMRI to detect deception at the individual level. Further work is required to determine how well this technology  will work in different settings and populations.
16185668	31	n = 31
16216534	13	n = 13	Effective fear processing relies on the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC). Post-trauma reactions provide a compelling model for examining how the heightened experience of fear impacts these systems. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has been associated with excessive amygdala and a lack of MPFC activity in response to nonconscious facial signals of fear, but responses to consciously processed facial fear stimuli have not been examined. We used functional MRI to elucidate the effect of trauma reactions on amygdala-MPFC function during an overt fear perception task. Subjects with PTSD (n = 13) and matched non-traumatized healthy subjects (n = 13) viewed 15 blocks of eight fearful face stimuli alternating pseudorandomly with 15 blocks of neutral faces (stimulus duration 500 ms; ISI 767 ms). We used random effects analyses in SPM2 to examine within- and between-group differences in the MPFC and amygdala search  regions of interest. Time series data were used to examine amygdala-MPFC associations and changes across the first (Early) versus second (Late) phases of  the experiment. Relative to non-traumatized subjects, PTSD subjects showed a marked bilateral reduction in MPFC activity (in particular, right anterior cingulate cortex, ACC), which showed a different Early-Late pattern to non-traumatized subjects and was more pronounced with greater trauma impact and symptomatology. PTSD subjects also showed a small but significant enhancement in  left amygdala activity, most apparent during the Late phase, but reduction in Early right amygdala response. Over the time course, trauma was related to a distinct pattern of ACC and amygdala connections. The findings suggest that major life trauma may disrupt the normal pattern of medial prefrontal and amygdala regulation.
16216534	13	n = 13
16284758	9	n = 9	To explicate the neural correlates of sex differences in visuospatial and verbal  fluency tasks, we examined behavioural performance and blood-oxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) regional brain activity, using functional magnetic resonance imaging, during a three-dimensional (3D) mental rotation task and a compressed sequence overt verbal fluency task in a group of healthy men (n=9) and women (n=10; tested during the low-oestrogen phase of the menstrual cycle). Men outperformed women on the mental rotation task, and women outperformed men on the verbal fluency task. For the mental rotation task, men and women activated areas in the right superior parietal lobe and the bilateral middle occipital gyrus in association with the rotation condition. In addition, men activated the left middle temporal gyrus and the right angular gyrus. For verbal fluency, men activated areas in the bilateral superior frontal gyrus, right cingulate gyrus, left precentral gyrus, left medial frontal gyrus, left inferior frontal gyrus, thalamus, left parahippocampal gyrus and bilateral lingual gyrus, and women activated areas in the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus  and left caudate. Despite observing task related activation in the hypothesised areas in men and women, no areas significantly differentiated the two sexes. Our  results demonstrate comparable brain activation in men and women in association with mental rotation and verbal fluency function with differential performance, and provide support for sex differences in brain-behaviour relationships.
16284758	10	n = 10
16330505	68	n = 68	The way in which medication overuse transforms episodic migraine into chronic daily headache is unknown. To search for candidate brain areas involved in this process, we measured glucose metabolism with 18-FDG PET in 16 chronic migraineurs with analgesic overuse before and 3 weeks after medication withdrawal and compared the data with those of a control population (n = 68). Before withdrawal, the bilateral thalamus, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), anterior cingulate gyrus, insula/ventral striatum and right inferior parietal lobule were hypometabolic, while the cerebellar vermis was hypermetabolic. All dysmetabolic areas recovered  to almost normal glucose uptake after withdrawal of analgesics, except the OFC where a further metabolic decrease was found. A subanalysis showed that most of the orbitofrontal hypometabolism was due to eight patients overusing combination  analgesics and/or an ergotamine-caffeine preparation. Medication overuse headache is thus associated with reversible metabolic changes in pain processing structures like other chronic pain disorders, but also with persistent orbitofrontal hypofunction. The latter is known to occur in drug dependence and could predispose subgroups of migraineurs to recurrent analgesic overuse.
16434066	83	n = 83	There is a growing interest both in identifying the neural mechanisms of magnitude estimation and in identifying forms of bias that can explain aspects of behavioral syndromes like unilateral neglect. Magnitude estimation is associated  with activation of temporo-parietal cortex in both cerebral hemispheres of normal subjects; however, it is unclear if and how left hemisphere lesions bias magnitude estimation because the infrequency of neglect and the presence of aphasia in these subjects confound examination. In contrast, we examined magnitude estimation using 12 different types of sensory stimuli that spanned five sensory domains in two patients with very different clinical presentations following unilateral left hemisphere stroke. One patient had neglect sub-acutely  without aphasia. The other had aphasia chronically after a temporo-parietal lesion but not neglect. The neglect patient was re-examined 48 h after being treated with modafinil (Provigil) for decreased arousal. Both patients demonstrated bias in magnitude estimation relative to normal subjects (n=83). Alertness improved in the neglect patient after taking modafinil. His neglect also resolved and his magnitude estimates more closely resembled those of normal  subjects. This is the first evidence, to our knowledge, that left hemisphere injury can bias magnitude estimation in a manner similar but not identical to that associated with right hemisphere injury.
16434417	11	n = 11	The pathophysiology of central pain syndromes is still poorly understood and their treatment remains a major challenge. It has long been suggested that lesions of the spinothalamic pathways are necessary for developing these pain syndromes. The recently proposed thermosensory disinhibition theory suggests that reduction of the inhibition of thermal sensory afferents that affect nociceptive  systems may play a major pathophysiological role. Syringomyelia, which is frequently associated with central neuropathic pain, is characterized by a selective or preferential lesion of the spinothalamic tract resulting in thermosensory deficits of various extents and magnitudes. Thus, syringomyelia represents a unique 'pathological model' particularly suited to investigating the relationship between spinothalamic tract dysfunction, thermosensory deficits and  pain. Here, we systematically compared the sensory loss (thermal and mechanical), using quantitative sensory testing, between 46 consecutive syringomyelia patients with or without neuropathic pain. We then further investigated the mechanisms of  evoked pains in these patients, using functional MRI (fMRI) in a subgroup of patients with cold or brush-evoked allodynia, compared with patients without pain and healthy volunteers. We found no significant difference in the magnitude or extent of sensory deficits between patients with or without neuropathic pain, suggesting that lesions of the spinothalamic pathways are not sufficient for developing central pain. However, a different pattern of sensory deficits was observed between patients with spontaneous pain only (n = 11) and patients with both spontaneous pain and allodynia (n = 20), suggesting that the mechanisms of central pain are not univocal. In patients with spontaneous pain only, the thermal sensory loss was significantly more asymmetrical and there was a direct relationship between the extent of thermosensory deficits (i.e. deafferentation)  and the intensity of burning pain. In contrast, patients with allodynia had reduced thermal deficits, in terms of both magnitude and extent. In addition, the sensory deficits were different between patients with cold or tactile allodynia,  suggesting distinct pathophysiological mechanisms related to the sub-modalities of allodynia. Our fMRI study further confirmed this, showing that different sub-types of allodynia were associated with distinct patterns of brain activity,  which do not necessarily correspond to the 'pain matrix' involved in acute physiological pain. The prefrontal cortex was the only area consistently activated by pathological evoked pains, suggesting that alteration of high-level  pain modulatory mechanisms might play a major role in allodynia due to central lesion.
16434417	20	n = 20
16460690	21	n = 21	BACKGROUND: Prospective studies of young individuals at high risk of schizophrenia allow the investigation of whether neural abnormalities predate development of illness and, if present, have the potential to identify those who  may become ill. METHODS: We studied young individuals with at least two relatives with the disorder. At baseline functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan, none met criteria for any psychiatric disorder, but four subjects subsequently developed schizophrenia. We report the baseline functional imaging findings in these subjects performing a sentence completion task compared with normal control subjects (n = 21) and those at high risk with (n = 21) and without (n = 41) psychotic symptoms who have not developed the disorder. RESULTS: High-risk subjects who became ill demonstrated increased activation of the parietal lobe, decreased activation of the anterior cingulate, and smaller increases in activation with increasing task difficulty in the right lingual gyrus and bilateral temporal regions. The hypothesized predictive power of parietal activation was supported only in combination with lingual gyrus activity, which gave a positive predictive value in this sample of .80. CONCLUSIONS: Although these findings should be considered cautiously, as only four subjects who had an  fMRI scan subsequently became ill, they suggest functional abnormalities are present in high-risk subjects who later became ill, which distinguish them not only from normal control subjects but also those at high risk who had not developed the disorder. These differences are detectable with fMRI and may have clinical utility.
16460690	21	n = 21
16460690	41	n = 41
16473020	18	n = 18	To elucidate the function of the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) in taste encoding, it is worth applying to taste, the psychological paradigms of intentional memorization that have been used with other extensively studied senses, and thus updating current models for LPFC functions to include a taste modality. Using multichannel functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), we examined the LPFC's of healthy volunteers (N = 18) during the intentional memorization of a basic taste. In order to minimize the confounding effects of verbal processes that are known to employ the left LPFC, we used quaternary taste mixtures that were difficult to verbalize, and confined analysis to those who did not use a verbal strategy during memorization (N = 10). In order to examine the results in association with data in the literature, the location of activity was  probabilistically estimated and anatomically labeled in the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) standard brain space. By contrasting the cortical activation under encoding conditions with that under control conditions without memory requirement, we found activation in the bilateral ventro-LPFC and the right posterior portion of the LPFC. The activation pattern was consistent with previous studies on the encoding of nonverbal materials using other senses. This  suggests that models for LPFC functions that derive from previous studies can be  generalized to intentional encoding processes of taste information, at least at a macro-structural level. The current study also demonstrates that, by using fNIRS, LPFC functions on taste can be examined with experimental paradigms relevant to those used for other senses.
16473020	10	n = 10
16490367	12	n = 12	Morality depends on a set of cultural rules that regulate interpersonal behaviour and provide a basis for social cohesion. The interpretation of moral transgressions and their affective consequences depends on whether the action is  intentional or accidental, and whether one is the agent of or witness to the action. We used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate whether the amygdala is involved in judging one's own moral violation of social norms. In this study, participants (n = 12) were asked to make evaluations regarding the degree of inappropriateness of social behaviours described in stories in which they themselves, or someone else, transgressed social norms either intentionally or accidentally. Consistent with our hypothesis, the amygdala was activated when participants considered stories narrating their own intentional transgression of social norms. This result suggests the amygdala is important for affective responsiveness to moral transgressions.
16515772	10	n = 10	We used 3-T functional magnetic resonance imaging to compare the brain mechanisms underlying selective attention to sound location and pitch. In different tasks, the subjects (N = 10) attended to a designated sound location or pitch or to pictures presented on the screen. In the Attend Location conditions, the sound location varied randomly (left or right), while the pitch was kept constant (high or low). In the Attend Pitch conditions, sounds of randomly varying pitch (high or low) were presented at a constant location (left or right). Both attention to  location and attention to pitch produced enhanced activity (in comparison with activation caused by the same sounds when attention was focused on the pictures)  in widespread areas of the superior temporal cortex. Attention to either sound feature also activated prefrontal and inferior parietal cortical regions. These activations were stronger during attention to location than during attention to pitch. Attention to location but not to pitch produced a significant increase of  activation in the premotor/supplementary motor cortices of both hemispheres and in the right prefrontal cortex, while no area showed activity specifically related to attention to pitch. The present results suggest some differences in the attentional selection of sounds on the basis of their location and pitch consistent with the suggested auditory "what" and "where" processing streams.
16525858	10	n = 10	RATIONALE: Psychotropic medication affects cognition and brain function, making it a potential confounder in functional neuroimaging studies of psychiatric patients. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the sub-acute administration of an antidepressant (escitalopram) would induce differences in cognitive performance and associated brain function, which could be observed within the normal power of a functional imaging study. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Healthy adults (N=10) received a short course of escitalopram (10 mg/day for 7 days). Participants performed a parametric working memory (WM) task during BOLD fMRI, both while medication-free  and after medication. To control for order effects, the medication-free examination was completed by half the subjects before starting medication and by  the other half at least one week after medication. RESULTS: Escitalopram had no significant effect on WM accuracy or reaction time. Preliminary analysis of the imaging data revealed no significant (p(corrected)<0.05) differences in memory-load-dependent activation between conditions. However, small volume correction analysis of regions that were significant prior to correction for multiple comparisons highlighted between condition differences in regions likely  to be susceptible to antidepressant effects (i.e. thalamus, anterior cingulate and inferior frontal gyrus). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the sub-acute administration of antidepressants in healthy controls does not affect cognitive or hemodynamic function in healthy adults to a magnitude greater than one standard deviation unit. Therefore, the confounding effect of antidepressants on signal intensity in imaging studies of medicated, depressed individuals may be limited.
16603133	10	n = 10	BACKGROUND: Although major depressive disorder (MDD) represents one of the most serious psychiatric problems afflicting adolescents, efforts to understand the neural circuitry of adolescent MDD have lagged behind those of adult MDD. This study tests the hypothesis that adolescent MDD is associated with abnormal amygdala activity during evocative-face viewing. METHODS: Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), between-group differences among MDD (n = 10),  anxious (n = 11), and non-psychiatric comparisons (n = 23) were examined during successful vs. unsuccessful face encoding, with encoding success measured post-scan. RESULTS: Compared to healthy adolescents, MDD patients exhibited poorer memory for faces. fMRI analyses accounted for this performance difference  through event-related methods. In an analysis comparing successful vs. unsuccessful face encoding, MDD patients exhibited greater left amygdala activation relative to healthy and anxious youth. CONCLUSIONS: Given prior findings among adults, this study suggests that adolescent and adult MDD may involve similar underlying abnormalities in amygdala functioning.
16603133	11	n = 11
16603133	23	n = 23
16616832	13	n = 13	Contemporary theories and evidence implicate frontal lobe dysfunction in violent  behaviour as well as in schizophrenia. We applied functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate and compare brain activation during an 'n-back' working memory task in groups of men with (i) schizophrenia and a history of serious physical violence (VS; n=13), (ii) schizophrenia without a history of violence (NVS: n=12), (iii) antisocial personality disorder (APD) and a history of serious physical violence (n=10), and (iv) no history of violence or a mental  disorder (n=13). We observed comparable performance in all four groups during the control (0-back) condition. Subtle working memory deficits were seen in the NVS and APD groups but severe deficits emerged in the VS group relative to the healthy group. The VS group showed activation deficit bilaterally in the frontal  lobe and precuneus when compared to the healthy group, and in the right inferior  parietal region when compared to the NVS group during the working memory load condition. Frontal (bilateral) as well as right inferior parietal activity was negatively associated with the ratings of violence across all schizophrenia patients, with the right parietal region showing this association most strongly.  APD patients, relative to healthy subjects, showed activation deficit in the left frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate and precuneus. It is concluded that reduced functional response in the frontal and inferior parietal regions leads to serious violence in schizophrenia perhaps via impaired executive functioning.
16616832	12	n = 12
16616832	10	n = 10
16616832	13	n = 13
16620884	19	n = 19	Audio-visual binding - as subset of crossmodal integration - describes the combination of information across both these senses to the subjective unified perception of a bound object. We investigated audio-visual binding by using the ventriloquism-effect (localization of a sound is biased towards and by a simultaneous visual stimulus) to act as an indicator for perceived binding. Simple visual and auditory stimuli were presented synchronously or asynchronously. fMRI was recorded during task performance (n = 19 subjects) in order to reveal activation in areas discussed to be involved in multisensory processing in the literature. Contrasting trials with reported ventriloquism-effect versus the no-binding condition revealed activation in the insula, superior temporal sulcus and parieto-occipital sulcus. Implementing the ventriloquism-effect allows us to relate these activations to consciousness-related processes, which probably are different from stimulus-driven multisensory integration in subcortical areas.
16624578	13	n = 13	Theory of Mind (ToM) or mentalizing is the ability of individuals to determine the intentions and behavior of others. This ability is known to be compromised in schizophrenia and has been shown to fluctuate with symptom severity. Neuropsychological investigations into relatives of individuals with schizophrenia have shown that some relatives also show a deficit in this area of  social cognition. In order to address this state and trait issue, we investigated the performance of high-risk relatives of individuals with schizophrenia to those of a matched control group (n = 13) on a blocked design visual joke fMRI paradigm. The task involved looking at two sets of cartoon jokes, one set which required mentalizing abilities to understand the jokes and another set that did not require such abilities. Relatives were divided into two groups based on the presence (HR+, n = 12) or absence (HR-, n = 12) of positive symptoms. The task provided robust activations across the groups in areas previously associated with mentalizing abilities, such as the PFC, precuneus, and temporal lobes. Significant between-group activations were observed in the PFC (primarily BA6, 8, and 9) with the HR- activating significantly greater than the HR+ in these regions. Both a secondary state-specific analysis and a third post hoc analysis further investigating state effects showed significant PFC between-group differences. This study is the first time relatives of individuals with schizophrenia have been imaged using a ToM paradigm, and the results provide evidence of both a state and state-mediated trait effect.
16624578	12	n = 12
16624578	12	n = 12
16631383	22	n = 22	In two previous fMRI studies, it was reported that eyes-open and eyes-closed conditions in darkness had differential effects on brain activity, and typical patterns of cortical activity were identified. Without external stimulation, ocular motor and attentional systems were activated when the eyes were open. On the contrary, the visual, somatosensory, vestibular, and auditory systems were activated when the eyes were closed. In this study, we investigated whether cortical areas related to the olfactory and gustatory system are also animated by eye closure without any other external stimulation. In a first fMRI experiment (n = 22), we identified cortical areas including the piriform cortex activated by olfactory stimulation. In a second experiment (n = 12) subjects lying in darkness in the MRI scanner alternately opened and closed their eyes. In accordance to previous studies, we found activation clusters bilaterally in visual, somatosensory, vestibular and auditory cortical areas for the contrast eyes-closed vs. eyes-open. In addition, we were able to show that cortical areas  related to the olfactory and gustatory system were also animated by eye closure.  These results support the hypothesis that there are two different states of mental activity: with the eyes closed, an "interoceptive" state characterized by  imagination and multisensory activity and with the eyes open, an "exteroceptive"  state characterized by attention and ocular motor activity. Our study also suggests that the chosen baseline condition may have a considerable impact on activation patterns and on the interpretation of brain activation studies. This needs to be considered for studies of the olfactory and gustatory system.
16631383	12	n = 12
16644239	17	n = 17	Speech perception in face-to-face conversation involves processing of speech sounds (auditory) and speech-associated mouth/lip movements (visual) from a speaker. Using PET where no scanner noise was present, brain regions involved in  speech cue processing were investigated with the normal hearing subjects with no  previous lip-reading training (N = 17) carrying out a semantic plausibility decision on spoken sentences delivered in a movie file. Multimodality was ensured at the sensory level in all four conditions. Sensory-specific speech cue of one sensory modality, i.e., auditory speech (A condition) or mouth movement (V condition), was delivered with a control stimulus of the other modality whereas speech cues of both sensory modalities (AV condition) were delivered during bimodal condition. In comparison to the control condition, extensive activations  in the superior temporal regions were observed bilaterally during the A condition but these activations were reduced in extent and left lateralized during the AV condition. Polymodal region such as left posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) involved in cross-modal interaction/integration of audiovisual speech was  found to be activated during the A and more so during the AV conditions but not during the V condition. Activations were observed in Broca's (BA 44), medial frontal (BA 8), and anterior ventrolateral prefrontal (BA 47) regions in the left during the V condition, where lip-reading performance was less successful. Results indicated that the speech-associated lip movements (visual speech cue) rendered suppression on the activity in the right auditory temporal regions. Overadditivity (AV > A + V) observed in the right postcentral region during the bimodal condition relative to the sum of unimodal speech conditions was also associated with reduced activity during the V condition. These findings suggested that visual speech cue could exert an inhibitory modulatory effect on the brain activities in the right hemisphere during the cross-modal interaction of audiovisual speech perception.
16648457	16	n = 16	A relatively common form of memory distortion arises when individuals must discriminate items they have seen from those they have imagined (reality monitoring). The present fMRI investigation (at 1.5 T) focused on the processes that relate to memory assignment regardless of accuracy (e.g. that correspond with the belief that an item was presented as a picture, regardless of whether that belief is correct). Prior to the scan, participants (n = 16) viewed concrete nouns and formed mental images of the object named. Half of the names were followed by the object's photo. During the scan, participants saw the object names and indicated whether the corresponding photo had been studied. Activity in visual-processing regions (including the precuneus and fusiform gyrus) corresponded with the attribution of an item to a pictorial presentation. In contrast, activity in regions thought to be important for self-referential processing (including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate  gyrus) was associated with attribution to a nonpresented source. These neural findings converge with behavioral evidence indicating that individuals use the amount of different types of information retrieved (e.g. perceptual detail, information about cognitive operations) to determine whether an item was imagined or perceived.
16650836	71	n = 71	We combined the data of five event-related fMRI studies of response inhibition. The re-analysis (n = 71) revealed response inhibition to be accomplished by a largely right hemisphere network of prefrontal, parietal, subcortical and midline regions, with converging evidence pointing to the particular importance of the right frontal operculum. Functional differences were observed between the sexes with greater activity in females in many of these cortical regions. Despite the relatively narrow age range (18-46), cortical activity, on the whole, tended to increase with age, echoing a pattern of functional recruitment often observed in  the elderly. More absent minded subjects showed greater activity in fronto-parietal areas, while speed of Go trial responses produced a varied pattern of activation differences in more posterior and subcortical areas. Although response inhibition produces robust activation in a discrete network of  brain regions, these results reveal that individual differences impact on the relative contribution made by the nodes of this network.
16702192	3	n = 3	Recovery of motor function after subcortical stroke appears to be related to the  integrity of descending connections from the ipsilesional cortical motor system,  a view supported by the observation of greater than normal movement-related activation in ipsilesional motor regions in chronic subcortical stroke patients.  This suggests that damage to the descending output fibres from one region of the  cortical motor system may be compensated by activity in areas that retain corticofugal outputs. Though the trajectories of corticofugal fibres from each major component of the motor system through the corona radiata and internal capsule are well described in non-human primates, they have not been described fully in humans. Our study set out to map the trajectories of these connections in a group of healthy volunteers (8 male, 4 female; age range = 31-68 years, median = 48.5 years) and establish whether this knowledge can be used to assess stroke-induced disconnection of the cortical motor system and better interpret functional reorganization of the cortical motor system. We describe the trajectories of the connections from each major component of the motor system to  the cerebral peduncle using diffusion-weighted imaging and probabilistic tractography in normal subjects. We observed good reproducibility of these connections over subjects. The comparative topography of these connections revealed many similarities between humans and other primates. We then inferred damage to corticofugal pathways in stroke patients (n = 3) by comparing the overlap between regions of subcortical white matter damage with the trajectories  of the connections to each motor area. In a small series of case studies, we found that inferred disconnections could explain enhanced hand-grip-related responses, as assessed with functional MRI, in the ipsilesional motor system. These results confirm that selective disruption of motor corticofugal fibres influences functional reorganization and outcome in individual patients.
16797923	8	n = 8	BACKGROUND: The differential diagnosis between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder during adolescence presents a major clinical problem. Can these two diagnoses be  differentiated objectively early in the courses of illness? METHODS: We used linear discrimination analysis (LDA) to classify 28 adolescent subjects into one  of three diagnostic categories (healthy, N=8; schizophrenia, N=10; bipolar, N=10) using subsets from a pool of 45 variables as potential predictors (22 neuropsychological test scores and 23 quantitative structural brain measurements). The predictor variables were adjusted for age, gender, race, and psychotropic medication. All possible subsets composed of k=2-12 variables, from  the set of 45 variables available, were evaluated using the robust leaving-one-subject-out method. RESULTS: The highest correct classification (96%) of the 3 diagnostic categories was yielded by 9 sets of k=12 predictors, comprising both neuropsychological and brain structural measures. Although each one of these sets misclassified one case, each set correctly classified (100%) at least one group, such that a fully correct diagnosis could be reached by a tree-type decision procedure. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that LDA with 12 predictor variables can provide correct and robust classification of subjects into the three diagnostic categories above. This robust classification relies upon both neuropsychological and brain structural information. Our results demonstrate that, despite overlapping clinical symptoms, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder can be differentiated early in the course of disease. This finding has two important implications. Firstly, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are different illnesses. If schizophrenia and bipolar are dissimilar clinical manifestations of the same disease, we would not be able to use non-clinical information to classify ('diagnose') schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Secondly, if this study's findings are replicated, brain structure (MRI) and brain function (neuropsychological) used together may be useful in the diagnosis of new patients.
16797923	10	n = 10
16797923	10	n = 10
16798016	16	n = 16	Alexithymic individuals have difficulty in recognizing and describing emotions in themselves. We investigated the neuronal basis of mentalizing in alexithymia to determine whether there is a common neuronal substrate associated with knowing the mental states of the self and others. Individuals high in alexithymia (n = 16) and low in alexithymia (n = 14) were selected from a pool of 310 college students using a combination of the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20) and the Structured Interview version of the Beth Israel Questionnaire (SIBIQ). We compared the two groups on psychological measures, including ratings of mentalizing and the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI), and regional brain activation using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during a mentalizing animation task. The results for both groups showed activation in regions associated with mentalizing: medial prefrontal cortices (MPFC), temporo-parietal junctions (TPJ), and the temporal pole (TP). Alexithymics had lower mentalizing and IRI perspective-taking scores and less activation in the right MPFC. Activity in the MPFC was positively correlated with the mentalizing score and the IRI perspective-taking score. Although there were no group differences in cerebral activity in the TPJ and the TP, the activity in the right TP had a positive correlation with mentalizing and IRI personal distress scores.  These results suggest that alexithymic individuals have an impairment in mentalizing associated with an inability to take the perspective of others. Thus, the skills involved in comprehending the self and others are inter-related and play an important role in emotion regulation.
16798016	14	n = 14
16891125	16	n = 16	We examined the impact of witnesses on the neural response to moral and social transgressions using fMRI. In this study, participants (N=16) read short vignettes describing moral and social transgressions in the presence or absence of an audience. In line with our hypothesis, ventrolateral (BA 47) and dorsomedial (BA 8) frontal cortex showed increased BOLD responses to moral transgressions regardless of audience and to social transgressions in the presence of an audience relative to neutral situations. These findings are consistent with the suggestion that these regions of prefrontal cortex modify behavioral responses in response to social cues. Greater activity was observed in left temporal-parietal junction, medial prefrontal cortex and temporal poles to moral and to a lesser extent social transgressions relative to neutral stories, regardless of audience. These regions have been implicated in the representation  of the mental states of others (Theory of Mind). The presence of an audience was  associated with increased left amygdala activity across all conditions.
16928798	16	n = 16	To plan a reaching movement, the brain must integrate information about the location of the target with information about the limb selected for the reach. Here, we applied rapid event-related 3-T fMRI to investigate this process in human subjects (n = 16) preparing a reach following two successive visual instruction cues. One cue instructed which arm to use; the other cue instructed the location of the reach target. We hypothesized that regions involved in the integration of target and effector information should not only respond to each of the two instruction cues, but should respond more strongly to the second cue due  to the added integrative processing to establish the reach plan. We found bilateral regions in the posterior parietal cortex, the premotor cortex, the medial frontal cortex, and the insular cortex to be involved in target-arm integration, as well as the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and an area in the right lateral occipital sulcus to respond in this manner. We further determined the functional properties of these regions in terms of spatial and effector specificity. This showed that the posterior parietal cortex and the dorsal premotor cortex specify both the spatial location of a target and the effector selected for the response. We therefore conclude that these regions are  selectively engaged in the neural computations for reach planning, consistent with the results from physiological studies in nonhuman primates.
16944492	12	n = 12	Relative to individuals who do not have addictive disorders, drug abusers exhibit greater devaluation of rewards as a function of their delay ("delay discounting"). The present study sought to extend this finding to methamphetamine (MA) abusers and to help understand its neural basis. MA abusers (n = 12) and control subjects who did not use illicit drugs (n = 17) participated in tests of  delay discounting with hypothetical money rewards. We then used a derived estimate of each individual's delay discounting to generate a functional magnetic resonance imaging probe task consisting of three conditions: "hard choices," requiring selections between "smaller, sooner" and "larger, later" alternatives that were similarly valued given the individual's delay discounting; "easy choices," in which alternatives differed dramatically in value; and a "no choice" control condition. MA abusers exhibited more delay discounting than control subjects (P < 0.05). Across groups, the "hard choice > no choice" contrast revealed significant effects in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, and areas surrounding the intraparietal sulcus (IPS). With group comparisons limited to these clusters, the "hard choice > easy choice" contrast indicated significant group differences in task-related activity within the left DLPFC and right IPS; qualitatively similar nonsignificant effects were present in the other clusters tested. Whereas control subjects showed less recruitment associated with easy than with hard choices, MA abusers generally did not. Correlational analysis did  not indicate a relationship between this anomaly in frontoparietal recruitment and greater degree of delay discounting exhibited by MA abusers. Therefore, while apparent inefficiency of cortical processing related to decision-making in MA abusers may contribute to the neural basis of enhanced delay discounting by this  population, other factors remain to be identified.
16944492	17	n = 17
16984899	5	n = 5	The superior frontal gyrus (SFG) is thought to contribute to higher cognitive functions and particularly to working memory (WM), although the nature of its involvement remains a matter of debate. To resolve this issue, methodological tools such as lesion studies are needed to complement the functional imaging approach. We have conducted the first lesion study to investigate the role of the SFG in WM and address the following questions: do lesions of the SFG impair WM and, if so, what is the nature of the WM impairment? To answer these questions, we compared the performance of eight patients with a left prefrontal lesion restricted to the SFG with that of a group of 11 healthy control subjects and two groups of patients with focal brain lesions [prefrontal lesions sparing the SFG (n = 5) and right parietal lesions (n = 4)] in a series of WM tasks. The WM tasks (derived from the classical n-back paradigm) allowed us to study the impact of the SFG lesions on domain (verbal, spatial, face) and complexity (1-, 2- and 3-back) processing within WM. As expected, patients with a left SFG lesion exhibited a WM deficit when compared with all control groups, and the impairment  increased with the complexity of the tasks. This complexity effect was significantly more marked for the spatial domain. Voxel-to-voxel mapping of each  subject's performance showed that the lateral and posterior portion of the SFG (mostly Brodmann area 8, rostral to the frontal eye field) was the subregion that contributed the most to the WM impairment. These data led us to conclude that (i) the lateral and posterior portion of the left SFG is a key component of the neural network of WM; (ii) the participation of this region in WM is triggered by the highest level of executive processing; (iii) the left SFG is also involved in spatially oriented processing. Our findings support a hybrid model of the anatomical and functional organization of the lateral SFG for WM, according to which this region is involved in higher levels of WM processing (monitoring and manipulation) but remains oriented towards spatial cognition, although the domain specificity is not exclusive and is overridden by an increase in executive demand, regardless of the domain being processed. From a clinical perspective, this study provides new information on the impact of left SFG lesions on cognition that will be of use to neurologists and neurosurgeons.
16984899	4	n = 4
17010420	21	n = 21	The neurophysiological and neuroanatomical foundations of developmental language  disorder (DLD) are still a matter of dispute. A main argument is that children with DLD show atypical anatomical asymmetries of speech-relevant brain areas, which possibly affect efficient language processing. In contrast to previous anatomical studies in DLD children, this study employed voxel based morphometry (VBM) in order to search for brain anomalies outside the classical language areas. Children with DLD (n=21) and healthy children (n=21) matched for age, sex, hand preference, and education were studied using high-resolution MRI scans. Using a new variant of the voxel-based morphometry technique (augmented VBM), the brains of children with DLD and control children were compared with respect to white matter (WM) and grey matter (GM) differences. In addition, simple hand motor tests were used to uncover possible motor impairments in DLD children. We found decreased WM volumes in a left-hemispheric network comprising the motor cortex, the dorsal premotor cortex, the ventral premotor cortex, and the planum polare on the superior temporal gyrus. In addition, DLD children exhibited motor  impairments in most of the applied motor tests. These results provide strong evidence that children with DLD have anomalous anatomy in a left-sided network comprising motor and language areas. Thus, this study supports the suggestion that motor and language functions are equally impaired because the underlying anatomical underpinnings are regionally identical.
17010420	21	n = 21
17020747	16	n = 16	BACKGROUND: Patients with schizophrenia have difficulty using contextual information to recall the source of information. Given the importance of the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex (PFC) in this type of memory, we hypothesized that this cognitive deficit stemmed from aberrant fronto-hippocampal activation during memory retrieval. METHODS: Patients with schizophrenia (n = 16) and age-matched comparison subjects (n = 16) underwent functional magnetic resonance  imaging while performing a verbal memory task that requires intact use of temporal context. Blood oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signal during correct memory decisions was compared between the two groups with statistical parametric  mapping. RESULTS: Contrary to our hypotheses, patients with schizophrenia demonstrated nearly identical memory performance to that of the comparison subjects. Despite this, there were significant between-group BOLD signal differences, including a pattern of task-dependent hypofrontality or hyperfrontality. In addition, whereas the highest-performing subset of the comparison group demonstrated robust modulation of hippocampal activity, this pattern was not seen in the highest-performing patients with schizophrenia. CONCLUSIONS: Despite memory performance similar to that of comparison subjects, patients with schizophrenia activated different neural pathways to achieve this success. This might reflect underlying neuropathology in fronto-hippocampal circuitry, the use of an alternate cognitive strategy to accomplish task performance, or both.
17020747	16	n = 16
17021168	53	n = 53	The human amygdala has classically been viewed as a brain structure primarily related to emotions and dissociated from higher cognition. We report here findings suggesting that the human amygdala also has a role in supporting working memory (WM), a canonical higher cognitive function. In a first functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study (n = 53), individual differences in amygdala activity predicted behavioral performance in a 3-back WM task. Specifically, higher event-related amygdala amplitude predicted faster response time (RT; r = -0.64), with no loss of accuracy. This relationship was not contingent on mood state, task content, or personality variables. In a second fMRI study (n = 21), we replicated the key finding (r = -0.47) and further showed that the correlation between the amygdala and faster RT was specific to a high working memory load condition (3-back) compared with a low working memory load condition (1-back). These results support models of amygdala function that can account for its involvement not only in emotion but also higher cognition.
17021168	21	n = 21
17027928	33	n = 33	BACKGROUND: Although morphometric studies of bipolar disorder (BD) suggest that neurofunctional abnormalities reflect underlying structural changes, it remains unclear whether abnormalities are present at illness onset or reflect disease progression. Previous voxel-based morphometry (VBM) findings suggest that ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) changes develop over time, whereas morphologic abnormalities elsewhere in the anterior limbic network (ALN) are present early in BD. In this study, we used VBM to explore structural brain changes in first-episode bipolar patients. METHODS: First-episode bipolar (n = 33) and healthy (n = 33) subjects underwent magnetic resonance imaging. Images were normalized and compared on a voxel-by-voxel basis. RESULTS: Bipolar subjects showed no change in VLPFC density or volume. We observed increased volume in left thalamus and fusiform and cerebellum bilaterally; increased gray matter density in anterior cingulate and posterior parietal structures; and increased gray matter volume and density in middle/superior temporal and posterior cingulate gyri. No areas of decreased volume or density were observed. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that structural changes are absent from VLPFC early in the course of BD. Morphologic abnormalities are present in other portions of the ALN and in  structures previously observed to mediate neurofunctional changes in BD, suggesting that dysfunctional neuronal proliferation or pruning may occur in bipolar patients.
17027928	33	n = 33
17067740	11	n = 11	Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is a debilitating chronic pain condition, yet there  is a lack of knowledge regarding underlying brain activity. Here we identify brain regions involved in spontaneous pain of PHN (n=11) and determine its modulation with Lidoderm therapy (patches of 5% lidocaine applied to the PHN affected body part). Continuous ratings of fluctuations of spontaneous pain during fMRI were contrasted to ratings of fluctuations of a bar observed during scanning, at three sessions: (1) pre-treatment baseline, (2) after 6h of Lidoderm treatment, and (3) after 2 weeks of Lidoderm use. Overall brain activity for spontaneous pain of PHN involved affective and sensory-discriminative areas: thalamus, primary and secondary somatosensory, insula and anterior cingulate cortices, as well as areas involved in emotion, hedonics, reward, and punishment: ventral striatum, amygdala, orbital frontal cortex, and ventral tegmental area. Generally, these activations decreased at sessions 2 and 3, except right anterior insular activity which increased with treatment. The sensory and affective activations only responded to the short-term treatment (6h of Lidoderm); while the ventral striatum and amygdala (reward-related regions) decreased mainly with  longer-term treatment (2 weeks of Lidoderm). Pain properties: average magnitude of spontaneous pain, and responses on Neuropathic Pain Scale (NPS), decreased with treatment. The ventral striatal and amygdala activity best reflected changes in NPS, which was modulated only with longer-term treatment. The results show a specific brain activity pattern for PHN spontaneous pain, and implicate areas involved in emotions and reward as best reflecting changes in pain with treatment.
17133388	20	n = 20	Functional MRI was used to identify the brain areas underlying automatic beliefs  about gender and race, and suppression of those attitudes. Participants (n = 20;  7 females) were scanned at 3 tesla while performing the Implicit Association Test (IAT), an indirect measure of race and gender bias. We hypothesized that ventromedial prefrontal cortex areas (PFC) would mediate gender and racial stereotypic attitudes, and suppression of these beliefs would recruit dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Performance data on the IAT revealed gender and racial biases. Racial bias was correlated with an explicit measure of racism. Results showed activation of anteromedial PFC and rostral ACC while participants implicitly made associations  consistent with gender and racial biases. In contrast, associations incongruent with stereotypes recruited DLPFC. Implicit gender bias was correlated with amygdala activation during stereotypic conditions. Results suggest there are dissociable roles for anteromedial and dorsolateral PFC circuits in the activation and inhibition of stereotypic attitudes.
17150987	16	n = 16	Because awareness of emotional states in the self is a prerequisite to recognizing such states in others, alexithymia (ALEX), difficulty in identifying  and expressing one's own emotional states, should involve impairment in empathy.  Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we compared an ALEX group (n  = 16) and a non-alexithymia (non-ALEX) group (n = 14) for their regional hemodynamic responses to the visual perception of pictures depicting human hands  and feet in painful situations. Subjective pain ratings of the pictures and empathy-related psychological scores were also compared between the 2 groups. The ALEX group showed less cerebral activation in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), the dorsal pons, the cerebellum, and the left caudal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) within the pain matrix. The ALEX group showed greater activation in the right insula and inferior frontal gyrus. Furthermore, alexithymic participants scored lower on the pain ratings and on the scores related to mature empathy. In conclusion, the hypofunction in the DLPFC, brain stem, cerebellum, and ACC and the lower pain-rating and empathy-related scores in ALEX are related to cognitive impairments, particularly executive and regulatory  aspects, of emotional processing and support the importance of self-awareness in  empathy.
17150987	14	n = 14
17188900	60	n = 60	Echo-planar imaging (EPI) generates considerable acoustic noise by rapidly oscillating gradients. In functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI), unshielded EPI sounds activate the auditory system inasmuch as it is responsive.  Instead of attenuating EPI noise, our goal was to utilize it for auditory FMRI by omitting read-outs from the pulse sequence's gradient train. Read-out gradient pulses are the primary noise determinant of EPI introducing its peak sound level  and fundamental frequency peak which inversely relates to twice the echo spacing. Using model-driven analyses, we demonstrate that withholding read-outs from EPI is suited to reliably evoke hemodynamic blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD)  signal modulations bilaterally in the auditory cortex of normal hearing subjects  (n=60). To investigate the utility of EPI read-out omissions for auditory FMRI at an individual subject's level, we compare traditional Family-Wise-Error-Rate (FWER)-corrected maximum height thresholding to spatial mixture modeling (SMM). With the latter, appropriate bilateral auditory activations were confirmed in 95% of the individuals, whereas FWER-based voxel thresholding detected such activations in up to 72%. We illustrate the applicability of this novel EPI modification for clinical diagnostic purposes and report on a patient with bilateral large vestibular aqueducts (LVAs) and severe binaural sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL). In this particular case, read-out omissions from EPI were used to assert residual audition prior to cochlear implantation (CI). Requiring no specific task compliance or sophisticated stimulation equipment other than the scanner on its own, FMRI by read-out omissions lends itself to auditory investigations and to quickly probe audition.
17229578	29	n = 29	Extraversion and neuroticism are two important and frequently studied dimensions  of human personality. They describe individual differences in emotional responding that are quite stable across the adult lifespan. Neuroimaging research has begun to provide evidence that neuroticism and extraversion have specific neuroanatomical correlates within the cerebral cortex and amygdala of young adults. However, these brain areas undergo alterations in size with aging, which  may influence the nature of these personality factor-brain structure associations in the elderly. One study in the elderly demonstrated associations between perisylvian cortex structure and measures of self transcendence [Kaasinen, V., Maguire, R.P., Kurki, T., Bruck, A., Rinne, J.O., 2005. Mapping brain structure and personality in late adulthood. NeuroImage 24, 315-322], but the neuroanatomical correlates of extraversion and neuroticism, or other measures of  the Five Factor Model of personality have not been explored. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the structural correlates of neuroticism and extraversion in healthy elderly subjects (n=29) using neuroanatomic measures of the cerebral cortex and amygdala. We observed that the thickness of specific lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) regions, but not amygdala volume, correlates with measures of extraversion and neuroticism. The results suggest differences in the  regional neuroanatomic correlates of specific personality traits with aging. We speculate that this relates to the influences of age-related structural changes in the PFC.
17239620	22	n = 22	In this study, we examined the impact of goal-directed processing on the response to emotional pictures and the impact of emotional pictures on goal-directed processing. Subjects (N=22) viewed neutral or emotional pictures in the presence  or absence of a demanding cognitive task. Goal-directed processing disrupted the  BOLD response to emotional pictures. In particular, the BOLD response within bilateral amygdala and inferior frontal gyrus decreased during concurrent task performance. Moreover, the presence of both positive and negative distractors disrupted task performance, with reaction times increasing for emotional relative to neutral distractors. Moreover, in line with the suggestion of the importance of lateral frontal regions in emotional regulation [Ochsner, K. N., Ray, R. D., Cooper, J. C., Robertson, E. R., Chopra, S., Gabrieli, J. D., et al. (2004). For  better or for worse: neural systems supporting the cognitive down-and up-regulation of negative emotion. NeuroImage, 23(2), 483-499], connectivity analysis revealed positive connectivity between lateral superior frontal cortex and regions of middle frontal cortex previously implicated in emotional suppression [Beauregard, M., Levesque, J., and Bourgouin, P. (2001). Neural correlates of conscious self-regulation of emotion. J. Neurosci., 21 (18), RC165.; Levesque, J., Eugene, F., Joanette, Y., Paquette, V., Mensour, B., Beaudoin, G., et al. (2003). Neural circuitry underlying voluntary suppression of sadness. Biol. Psychiatry, 53 (6), 502-510.; Ohira, H., Nomura, M., Ichikawa, N., Isowa, T., Iidaka, T., Sato, A., et al. (2006). Association of neural and physiological responses during voluntary emotion suppression. NeuroImage, 29 (3), 721-733] and negative connectivity with bilateral amygdala. These data suggest that processes involved in emotional regulation are recruited during task performance in the context of emotional distractors.
17274965	12	n = 12	The intranasal trigeminal system is involved in the perception of odors. To investigate the cerebral processing of sensory information from the trigeminal nerve in detail we studied subjects with and without olfactory function using functional magnetic resonance imaging. A normosmic group (n=12) was compared with a group of anosmic subjects (n=11). For trigeminal stimulation gaseous CO(2) was  used. Following right-sided stimulation with CO(2) controls exhibited a stronger  right-sided cerebral activation than anosmic subjects. Stronger activation was found in controls compared to anosmic subjects for the right prefrontal cortex, the right somatosensory cortex (SI), and the left parietal insula. In contrast, relatively higher activation was found in anosmic subjects for the left supplementary motor area in the frontal lobe, the right superior and middle temporal lobe, the left parahippocampal gyrus in the limbic lobe, and the sub-lobar region of the left putamen and right insula which was mostly due to a decreased BOLD signal of controls in these areas. Additional conjunction analysis revealed that activated areas common to the two groups were the cerebellum and the right premotor frontal cortex. These data suggest that the processing of the  trigeminally mediated information is different in the presence or absence of an intact sense of smell, pointing towards the intimate connection between the two chemosensory systems.
17274965	11	n = 11
17275792	10	n = 10	Recent perceptual neuroimaging studies have shown that intermodal selective attention extracts relevant information from one modality at the expense of another at the level of unimodal sensory cortex. The present paper sought 1) to determine the effects of intermodal selective attention on primary somatosensory  cortex (S1) during continuous sensorimotor transformations, 2) to investigate the interactions of spatial relationship between the target and distracter modalities on S1 and 3) to identify any potential modulators during continuous sensorimotor  transformations. Functional MRI was acquired while participants (n=10) received simultaneous vibrotactile and visuospatial stimulation. In each condition, participants tracked either vibrotactile stimulation (25 Hz), applied to the right index finger with variable intensity, or a visuospatial stimulus, a centrally presented dial where the spatial position of a needle randomly moved, by applying graded force to a force sensing resistor. The distracter modality either originated from a location that was spatially related or distinct to the target that guided movement. Vibrotactile tracking resulted in decreased S1 activation relative to when it was task-irrelevant. Neither S1 activity nor tracking performance was influenced by spatial relationship. In addition the superior parietal lobe/precuneus (BA 7), inferior parietal lobe (BA 40), precentral gyrus (BA 6) and secondary visual areas (BA 18 and 19) may modulate the extraction of task-relevant information while the insula (BA 13) may do so during cases of spatial conflict. We conclude that modulation of S1 is important  to the proper execution of sensory-guided movements and that sensorimotor requirements determine the mechanisms of intermodal selective attention.
17287508	8	n = 8	Primary progressive aphasia (PPA) is a neurodegenerative dementia syndrome principally characterized by the gradual dissolution of language functions, especially in the early stages of disorder. In a previous functional neuroimaging study, PPA patients were found to activate core language areas similarly to control subjects when performing semantic and phonological processing tasks (Sonty et al., 2003). In the present study, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and dynamic causal modeling (DCM) were used to study multiregional effective connectivity in early-stage PPA (n = 8) and control (n = 8) subjects performing semantic word matching and visual letter matching tasks. fMRI analysis showed semantic task-specific activations in the left inferior frontal (Broca's area) and posterior superior temporal (Wernicke's area) regions, in addition to other language regions, in both groups. Using a model language network consisting of six left hemisphere regions, the DCM analysis demonstrated reduced language-specific effective connectivity between Wernicke's and Broca's areas in  the PPA patient group. Furthermore, this decrement in connectivity was predictive of semantic task accuracy. These results demonstrate for the first time that dysfunctional network interactions (effective connectivity), rather than hypoactivity within individual brain regions, may contribute to the emergence of  language deficits seen in PPA.
17287508	8	n = 8
17293356	20	n = 20	Previous studies have suggested that imitators can reproduce known gestures shown by a model using a semantic, indirect route, and novel gestures using a sublexical, direct route. In the present study we aimed at testing the validity of such a dual-route model of action imitation. Patients with either left-brain damage (LBD) or right-brain damage (RBD) were tested on an action imitation task. Actions were either meaningful (n = 20) or meaningless (n = 20), and were presented in an intermingled list and, on a different day, in separate lists. We  predicted that, in the mixed condition, patients would use a direct route to imitate meaningful and meaningless actions, as it allows the imitation of both action types. In the blocked condition, patients were expected to select the semantic route for meaningful actions and the direct route for meaningless actions. As hypothesized, none of the 32 patients showed dissociations between imitation of meaningful and meaningless actions in the mixed presentation. In contrast, eight patients showed a dissociation between imitation of meaningful actions and imitation of meaningless actions in the blocked presentation. Moreover, two of these patients showed a classical double dissociation between the imitation of the two action types. Results were interpreted in support of the validity of a dual-route model for explaining action imitation. We argue that the decrease in imitation of meaningful actions, relative to meaningless actions, is  caused by a damage of the semantic route, and that the decline in imitation of meaningless actions, relative to meaningful actions, is produced by a breakdown of the direct route. The brain areas that were lesioned in all six LBD patients who showed a dissociation were in the superior temporal gyrus and the angular gyrus, whereas the two RBD subjects had common lesions of the pallidum and of the putamen. The brain structures affected in our patients with selective apraxia are consistent with those reported before in other neuropsychological reports. They are also in agreement with areas found activated in imaging studies in which the  neural mechanisms underlying imitation were examined.
17293356	20	n = 20
17317678	32	n = 32	This study sought to increase current understanding of the neuropsychological basis of poor reading ability by using fMRI to examine brain activation during a  visual sentence comprehension task among good and poor readers in the third (n =  32) and fifth (n = 35) grades. Reading ability, age, and the combination of both  factors made unique contributions to cortical activation. The main finding was of parietotemporal underactivation (less activation than controls) among poor readers at the 2 grade levels. A positive linear relationship (spanning both the  poor and good readers) was found between reading ability and activation in the left posterior middle temporal and postcentral gyri and in the right inferior parietal lobule such that activation increased with reading ability. Different developmental trajectories characterized good and poor readers in the left angular gyrus: activation increased with age among good readers, a change that failed to occur among poor readers. The parietotemporal cortex is discussed in terms of its role in reading acquisition, with the left angular gyrus playing a key role. It is proposed that the functioning of the cortical network underlying  reading is dependent on a combination of interacting factors, including physiological maturation, neural integrity, skill level, and the nature of the task.
17317678	35	n = 35
17331476	10	n = 10	Functional neuroimaging studies have largely been performed in patients with longstanding chronic posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Additionally, memory function of PTSD patients has been proved to be impaired. We sought to characterize the brain responses of patients with acute PTSD and implemented a trauma-related short-term memory recall paradigm. Individuals with acute severe PTSD (n=10) resulting from a mining accident and 7 men exposed to the mining accident without PTSD underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing the symptom provocation and trauma-related short-term memory recall paradigms. During symptom provocation paradigm, PTSD subjects showed diminished responses in right anterior cingulate gyrus, left inferior frontal gyrus and bilateral middle frontal gyrus and enhanced left parahippocampal gyrus  response compared with controls. During the short-term memory recall paradigm, PTSD group showed diminished responses in right inferior frontal gyrus, right middle frontal and left middle occipital gyrus in comparison with controls. PTSD  group exhibited diminished right parahippocampal gyrus response during the memory recall task as compared to the symptom provocation task. Our findings suggest that neurophysiological alterations and memory performance deficit have developed in acute severe PTSD.
17331743	16	n = 16	When assessed with performance measures, Emotional Intelligence (EI) correlates positively with the quality of social relationships. However, the bases of such correlations are not understood in terms of cognitive and neural information processing mechanisms. We investigated whether a performance measure of EI is related to reasoning about social situations (specifically social exchange reasoning) using versions of the Wason Card Selection Task. In an fMRI study (N=16), higher EI predicted hemodynamic responses during social reasoning in the  left frontal polar and left anterior temporal brain regions, even when controlling for responses on a very closely matched task (precautionary reasoning). In a larger behavioral study (N=48), higher EI predicted faster social exchange reasoning, after controlling for precautionary reasoning. The results are the first to directly suggest that EI is mediated in part by mechanisms supporting social reasoning and validate a new approach to investigating EI in terms of more basic information processing mechanisms.
17331743	48	n = 48
17360900	11	n = 11	Although erythropoietin (Epo) is best known for its effects on erythropoiesis, recent evidence suggests that it also has neurotrophic and neuroprotective properties in animal models of hippocampal function. Such an action in humans would make it an intriguing novel compound for the treatment of neurological and  psychiatric disorders. The current study therefore aimed to explore the effects of Epo on neural and behavioral measures of hippocampal function in humans using  a functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigm. Volunteers were randomized to receive intravenous injection of Epo (40,000 IU) or saline in a between-subjects, double-blind, randomized design. Neural response during picture encoding and retrieval was tested 1 week later. Epo increased hippocampus response during picture retrieval (n = 11) compared with placebo (n = 12; p = 0.04) independent of changes in hematocrit. This is consistent with upregulation of hippocampal BDNF and neurotrophic actions found in animals and highlights Epo as a promising  candidate for treatment of psychiatric disorders.
17360900	12	n = 12
17363277	17	n = 17	Studies on working memory (WM) dysfunction in schizophrenia have reported several functionally aberrant brain areas including the lateral prefrontal cortex, superior temporal areas and the striatum. However, less is known about the relationship of WM-dysfunction, cerebral activation, task-accuracy and diagnostic specificity. Using a novel WM-task and event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we studied healthy control subjects (n=17) and partially remitted, medicated inpatients meeting DSM-IV criteria for schizophrenia (n=19) and major depressive disorder (n=12). Due to the event-related technique, we excluded incorrectly performed trials, thus controlling for accuracy-related activation confounds. Compared with controls, patients with schizophrenia showed less activation in frontoparietal and subcortical regions at high cognitive load levels. Compared with patients with depression, schizophrenic patients showed less prefrontal activation in left inferior frontal cortex and right cerebellum. In patients with schizophrenia, a lack of deactivation of the superior temporal cortex was found compared to both healthy controls and patients with depression. Thus, we could not confirm previous findings of impaired lateral prefrontal activation during WM performance in schizophrenic patients after the exclusion of incorrectly performed or omitted trials in our functional analysis. However, superior temporal cortex dysfunction  in patients with schizophrenia may be regarded as schizophrenia-specific finding  in terms of psychiatric diagnosis specificity.
17363277	19	n = 19
17363277	12	n = 12
17376704	10	n = 10	Behavioral inhibition (BI) is a risk factor for anxiety disorders. While the two  constructs bear behavioral similarities, previous work has not extended these parallels to the neural level. This study examined amygdala reactivity during a task previously used with clinically anxious adolescents. Adolescents were selected for enduring patterns of BI or non-inhibition (BN). We examined amygdala response to evocative emotion faces in BI (N=10, mean 12.8 years) and BN (N=17, mean 12.5 years) adolescents while systematically manipulating attention. Analyses focused on amygdala response during subjective ratings of internal fear  (constrained attention) and passive viewing (unconstrained attention) during the  presentation of emotion faces (Happy, Angry, Fearful, and Neutral). BI adolescents, relative to BN adolescents, showed exaggerated amygdala response during subjective fear ratings and deactivation during passive viewing, across all emotion faces. In addition, the BI group showed an abnormally high amygdala response to a task condition marked by novelty and uncertainty (i.e., rating fear state to a Happy face). Perturbations in amygdala function are evident in adolescents temperamentally at risk for anxiety. Attention state alters the underlying pattern of neural processing, potentially mediating the observed behavioral patterns across development. BI adolescents also show a heightened sensitivity to novelty and uncertainty, which has been linked to anxiety. These patterns of reactivity may help sustain early temperamental biases over time and  contribute to the observed relation between BI and anxiety.
17376704	17	n = 17
17408973	9	n = 9	The neural mechanisms underlying feelings of fatigue are poorly understood. The primary purpose of the study was to use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to determine the association between feelings of mental fatigue and blood  oxygen level dependent (BOLD) brain responses during a mentally fatiguing cognitive task. Healthy, non-fatigued controls and chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) patients were included to determine the influence of chronic levels of fatigue on brain responses. We hypothesized that mental fatigue would be significantly related to brain activity during a fatiguing cognitive task but not during either a non-fatiguing motor (finger tapping) or cognitive (auditory monitoring) task. Patients (n=9) and controls (n=11) completed a finger tapping task, a simple auditory monitoring task and a challenging working memory task, designed to induce mental fatigue, while undergoing fMRI. Fatigue was measured prior to scanning and following each task during fMRI data collection. Results showed that mental fatigue was significantly related to brain activity during the fatiguing cognitive task but not the finger tapping or simple auditory monitoring tasks. Significant (p< or =0.005) positive relationships were found for cerebellar, temporal, cingulate and frontal regions. A significant (p=0.001) negative relationship was found for the left posterior parietal cortex. CFS participants did not differ from controls for either finger tapping or auditory monitoring tasks, but exhibited significantly greater activity in several cortical and subcortical regions during the fatiguing cognitive task. Our results suggest an association between subjective feelings of mental fatigue and brain responses during fatiguing cognition.
17408973	11	n = 11
17412509	15	n = 15	The selection of objects in the visual environment is important in everyday life  when acting in a goal-directed manner. Here we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate brain activity while healthy subjects (N=15) selectively reached to grasp a three-dimensional (3D) target stimulus presented either in isolation or in the presence of 3D non-target stimuli. A pneumatic MRI  compatible apparatus was designed to precisely control the presentation of 3D graspable stimuli within the scanner. During scanning subjects were instructed to reach and grasp towards a target presented at an unknown location either in isolation or flanked by two distractor objects. Results indicated that reaching towards and grasping the target object in the presence of other non-target stimuli was associated with greater activation within the contralateral primary motor cortex and the precuneus as compared to the execution of reach-to-grasp movements towards the target presented in isolation. We conclude that the presence of non-targets evokes a differential level of neural activity within areas responsible for the planning and execution of selective reach-to-grasp movement.
17412567	11	n = 11	The goal of this study was to compare neural activation patterns in patients with PTSD with and without current comorbid major depression. Traumatized subjects with PTSD (n=11), PTSD+major depression (MDD, n=15), and subjects (n=16) who met  criterion A for PTSD but never developed the disorder were studied using the script-driven symptom-provocation paradigm adapted to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) at a 4-Tesla field strength. Both the PTSD+MDD and PTSD-MDD groups revealed decreased brain activation in the anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 24) and the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (BA 47). After covariation for differences in PTSD severity between these groups, the left insula (BA 13) remained more significantly activated in the PTSD-MDD group than in the PTSD+MDD group. In contrast, the PTSD+MDD group showed greater activation  than the PTSD-MDD group in the bilateral anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 24) and posterior cingulate cortices (BA 23, 31). These results suggest different patterns of brain activation related to comorbid major depression occurring in the context of PTSD.
17412567	15	n = 15
17412567	16	n = 16
17427209	13	n = 13	22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is a well-known genetic risk factor for schizophrenia. The catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene falls within the 22q11.2 minimal critical region of the deletion. Brain activity, as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during a Go/NoGo, response inhibition task was assessed in adolescents with 22q11.2DS (n = 13), typically developing (TD) controls (n = 14), and controls with developmental disability (DD, n = 9). Subjects with 22q11.2DS were also genotyped for the COMT Met/Val polymorphism. Groups did not differ on task performance. However, compared to both control groups, the 22q11.2DS group showed greater brain activation within left parietal regions. Comparison of brain activation between 22q11.2DS Met and Val subgroups revealed significantly increased activation (Met>Val) in the cingulate but not the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. These preliminary findings  suggest that adolescents with 22q11.2DS compensate for executive dysfunction via  recruitment of parietal regions. Further, the COMT Met subgroup of 22q11.2DS may  recruit additional cingulate activation for tasks requiring attention and inhibition. 22q11.2DS is a unique model for learning about the deleterious effects of decreased dosage of the COMT gene on brain function.
17427209	14	n = 14
17427209	9	n = 9
17449179	6	n = 6	The anti-migraine drug sumatriptan often induces unpleasant somatosensory side effects, including a dislike of being touched. With a double-blind cross-over design, we studied the effects of sumatriptan and saline on perception (visual analogue scale) and cortical processing (functional magnetic resonance imaging) of tactile stimulation in healthy subjects. Soft brush stroking on the calf (n=6) was less pleasant (p<0.04) and evoked less activation of posterior insular cortex in the sumatriptan compared to the saline condition. Soft brushing activated pain processing regions (anterior insular, lateral orbitofrontal, and anterior cingulate cortices, and medial thalamus) only in the sumatriptan condition, whereas activation of somatosensory cortices was similar in both conditions. Soft brush stroking on the palm (n=6) was equally pleasant in both conditions. One possible mechanism for the activation of pain processing regions by brush stroking is sensitization of nociceptors by sumatriptan. Another possibility is inhibition of a recently discovered system of low-threshold unmyelinated tactile  (CT) afferents that are present in hairy skin only, project to posterior insular  cortex, and serve affective aspects of tactile sensation. An inhibition of impulse transmission in the CT system by sumatriptan could disinhibit nociceptive signalling and make light touch less pleasant. This latter alternative is consistent with the observed reduction in posterior insular cortex activation and the selective effects of stimulation on hairy compared to glabrous skin, which are not explained by the nociceptor sensitization account.
17449179	6	n = 6
17544015	21	n = 21	The interaction of emotion and cognition has become a topic of major interest. However, the influence of gender on the interplay between the two processes, along with its neural correlates have not been fully analysed so far. In this functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study we induced negative emotion using negative olfactory stimulation while male (n=21) and female (n=19) participants performed an n-back verbal working memory task. Based on findings indicating increased emotional reactivity in women, we expected the female participants to exhibit stronger activation in characteristically emotion-associated areas during the interaction of emotional and cognitive processing in comparison to the male participants. Both groups were found to be significantly impaired in their working memory performance by negative emotion induction. However, fMRI analysis revealed distinct differences in neuronal activation between groups. In men, cognitive performance under negative emotion induction was associated with extended activation patterns in mainly prefrontal and superior parietal regions. In women, the interaction between emotion and working memory yielded a significantly stronger response in the amygdala and the  orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) compared to their male counterparts. Our data suggest  that in women the interaction of verbal working memory and negative emotion is associated with relative hyperactivation in more emotion-associated areas whereas in men regions commonly regarded as important for cognition and cognitive control are activated. These results provide new insights in gender-specific cerebral mechanisms.
17544015	19	n = 19
17570347	13	n = 13	BACKGROUND: To further elucidate the close interrelation of pain and depression,  we investigated cerebral responses to parametrically varied thermal pain intensities in female patients suffering from major depressive disorder (MDD) (n  = 13) and matched control subjects (n = 13) by means of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). METHODS: After the assessment of the individual thermal pain threshold, an fMRI-compatible thermode was used to deliver thermal painful stimuli to the right arm. All stimuli were initiated for 10 sec from a baseline resting temperature (32 degrees C) in three different conditions (37 degrees C, 42 degrees C, 45 degrees C). Statistical Parametric Mapping 2 (SPM2) software was used for image processing and statistical analyses. RESULTS: Patients displayed significantly increased thermal pain thresholds. A comparable increase in blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal was observed in key structures of the pain matrix in patients and control subjects. Patients displayed hyperactivation  in comparison with control subjects for the painful 45 degrees C condition in the left ventrolateral thalamus, in the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), as well as a stronger parametric BOLD signal increase in the right VLPFC, DLPFC, and in the contralateral insula. Symptom severity correlated positively with the BOLD signal in the left ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus. CONCLUSIONS: We present evidence that cortical structures of the pain matrix are similarly activated in depressed patients and healthy subjects. We report increased prefrontal and lateral thalamic activation during the presentation of painful stimuli, which might explain reduced thermal pain perception on the skin in depressed patients.
17570347	13	n = 13
17575278	12	n = 12	The complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a disabling neuropathic pain condition that may develop following injuries of the extremities. In the present  study we sought to characterize motor dysfunction in CRPS patients using kinematic analysis and functional imaging investigations on the cerebral representation of finger movements. Firstly, 10 patients and 12 healthy control subjects were investigated in a kinematic analysis assessing possible changes of  movement patterns during target reaching and grasping. Compared to controls, CRPS patients particularly showed a significant prolongation of the target phase in this paradigm. The pattern of motor impairment was consistent with a disturbed integration of visual and proprioceptive inputs in the posterior parietal cortex. Secondly, we used functional MRI (fMRI) and investigated cortical activations during tapping movements of the CRPS-affected hand in 12 patients compared to healthy controls (n = 12). During finger tapping of the affected extremity, CRPS  patients showed a significant reorganization of central motor circuits, with an increased activation of primary motor and supplementary motor cortices (SMA). Furthermore, the ipsilateral motor cortex showed a markedly increased activation. When the individual amount of motor impairment was introduced as regressor in the fMRI analysis, we were able to demonstrate that activations of the posterior parietal cortices (i.e. areas within the intraparietal sulcus), SMA and primary motor cortex were correlated with the extent of motor dysfunction. In summary, the results of this study suggest that substantial adaptive changes within the central nervous system may contribute to motor symptoms in CRPS.
17582746	14	n = 14	Cocaine affects sensory perception and attention, but little is known about the neural substrates underlying these effects in the human brain. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and a sustained visuospatial attention task to  assess if the visual attention network is dysfunctional in cocaine abusers (n=14) compared to age-, gender-, and education-matched controls (n=14). Compared with controls, cocaine abusers showed (1) hypo-activation of the thalamus, which may reflect noradrenergic and/or dopaminergic deficits; (2) hyper-activation in occipital and prefrontal cortices, which may reflect increased visual cortical processing to compensate for inefficient visual thalamic processing; and (3) larger deactivation of parietal and frontal regions possibly to support the larger hemodynamic supply to the hyper-activated brain regions. These findings provide evidence of abnormalities in thalamo-cortical responses in cocaine abusers that are likely to contribute to the impairments in sensory processing and in attention. The development of therapies that diminish these thalamo-cortical deficits could improve the treatment of cocaine addiction.
17582746	14	n = 14
17588725	15	n = 15	The primary aim of this functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study was to test the utility of a paced motor activation task to evaluate frontal-subcortical (FSC) circuit function in bipolar depression. A secondary aim was to determine if utilizing both a motor and cognitive activation paradigm (Stroop) would provide information about the potential role of FSC dysfunction in the cognitive symptoms of bipolar depression. Analysis of the control group (n=15) alone revealed that the motor task activated FSC structures. Comparison of the control to bipolar group (n=14) revealed significant differences between the groups in striatum as well as cortical areas with FSC connections in response to the non-dominant-hand  motor task. In response to the Stroop, there were significant differences between the groups in portions of the bilateral posterior cingulate and occipital cortex, but not in FSC structures. While these results must be considered preliminary, this work supports further studies of paced motor tasks to probe FSC function. Further, it suggests that the use of both a cognitive and motor task in the same  study provides useful information about brain function. Finally, it supports the  literature implicating FSC circuit abnormalities in bipolar disorder.
17588725	14	n = 14
17611740	15	n = 15	RATIONALE: A dopamine receptor 4 variable number tandem repeat (DRD4 VNTR) polymorphism has been related to reactivity to smoking cues among smokers, but the effect of this genetic variation on brain responses to smoking cues has not been evaluated. OBJECTIVES: The present study evaluated the relationship between  carrying the DRD4 VNTR 7-repeat allele and transient functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) blood-oxygen-level-dependent responses to smoking cues among adult dependent cigarette smokers. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Smokers (n = 15)  underwent fMRI scanning after 2-h abstinence. During scanning, they viewed visual smoking and control cues. A blood sample was assayed for the DRD4 VNTR polymorphism, and participants were categorized based on whether they carried one or two copies of the 7-repeat allele (DRD4 L, n = 7) or not (DRD4 S, n = 8). RESULTS: Contrasts in brain cue-reactivity (smoking minus control cues) between DRD4 groups were conducted using SPM2. Smoking cues as compared to control cues elicited transient brain responses in right superior frontal gyrus (BA 8/9/10/32), left anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 32), and right cuneus (BA 19). Exposure to smoking cues resulted in greater activation of right superior frontal gyrus (BA 10) and right insula in DRD4 L compared to DRD4 S individuals. By contrast, exposure to smoking cues among DRD4 S individuals resulted in no significant increases in activation compared to DRD4 L individuals. CONCLUSIONS:  These brain imaging results suggest that DRD4 VNTR polymorphism is related to transient brain responses to smoking cues in regions subserving executive and somatosensory processes.
17611740	7	n = 7
17611740	8	n = 8
17628434	18	n = 18	Functional disintegration has been observed in schizophrenia during task performance. We sought to investigate functional disintegration during rest because an intrinsic functional brain organization, including both "task-negative" (i.e., "default mode") and "task-positive" networks, has been suggested to play an important role in integrating ongoing information processing. Additionally, the brain regions that are involved in the intrinsic organization are believed to be abnormal in schizophrenia. Patients with paranoid schizophrenia (N=18) and healthy volunteers (N=18) underwent a resting-state fMRI scan. Functional connectivity analysis was used to identify the connectivity between each pair of brain regions within this intrinsic organization, and differences were examined in patients versus healthy volunteers. Compared to healthy volunteers, patients showed significant differences in connectivity within networks and between networks, most notably in the connectivities associated with the bilateral dorsal medial prefrontal cortex, the lateral parietal region, the inferior temporal gyrus of the "task-negative" network and with the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the right dorsal premotor cortex of the "task-positive" network. These results suggested that the interregional functional connectivities in the intrinsic organization are altered in patients with paranoid schizophrenia. These abnormalities could be the source  of abnormalities in the coordination of and competition between information processing activities in the resting brain of paranoid patients.
17628434	18	n = 18
17678634	18	n = 18	BACKGROUND: Altered serotonergic function is thought to play a role in the pathophysiology of major depressive episodes based upon evidence from neuroimaging, pharmacological, postmortem and genetic studies. It remains unclear, however, whether depressed samples that differ with respect to having shown a unipolar versus a bipolar illness course also would show distinct patterns of abnormalities within the serotonergic system. The current study compared serotonin transporter (5-HTT) binding between unipolar-depressives (MDD), bipolar-depressives (BD) and healthy-controls (HC) to assess whether the abnormalities in 5-HTT binding recently found in depressed subjects with BD extend to depressed subjects with MDD. METHODS: The 5-HTT binding-potential (BP)  measured using positron emission tomography (PET) and [(11)C]DASB was compared between unmedicated, depressed subjects with MDD (n = 18) or BD (n = 18) and HC (n = 34). RESULTS: Relative to the healthy group both MDD and BD groups showed significantly increased 5-HTT BP in the thalamus (24%, 14%, respectively), insula (15%) and striatum (12%). The unipolar-depressives had elevated 5-HTT BP relative to both BD and HC groups in the vicinity of the periaqueductal gray (PAG, 20%, 22%, respectively). The bipolar-depressives had reduced 5-HTT BP relative to both HC and MDD groups in the vicinity of the pontine raphe nuclei. Depression-severity correlated negatively with 5-HTT BP in the thalamus in MDD-subjects. CONCLUSIONS: The depressed phases of MDD and BD both were associated with elevated 5-HTT binding in the insula, thalamus and striatum, but  showed distinct abnormalities in the brainstem. The latter findings conceivably could underlie differences in the patterns of illness symptoms and pharmacological sensitivity observed between MDD and BD.
17678634	18	n = 18
17678634	34	n = 34
17686466	10	n = 10	BACKGROUND: Stress-induced metabolic changes can have detrimental health effects. Newly developed paradigms to investigate stress in neuroimaging environments allow the assessment of brain activation changes in association with the perception of and the metabolic response to stress. METHODS: We exposed human subjects to a psychosocial stressor in one positron emission tomography (n = 10)  and one functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; n = 40) experiment. RESULTS: We observed a profound deactivation of limbic system components including hippocampus, hypothalamus, medio-orbitofrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex in subjects who reacted to the stressor with a significant increase of the endocrine stress marker cortisol. Further, in the fMRI study, the degree of deactivation in the hippocampus was correlated with the release of cortisol in response to the stress task. CONCLUSIONS: The observed deactivation of limbic system structures suggests elevated activation at rest and during nonstressful situations. A model is proposed where the observed reduction in limbic system activity is essential for the initiation of the stress response.
17686466	40	n = 40
17765877	16	n = 16	Cocaine abstinence is associated with impaired performance in cognitive functions including attention, vigilance and executive function. Here we test the hypothesis that cognitive dysfunction during cocaine abstinence reflects in part  impairment of cortical and subcortical regions modulated by dopamine. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study brain activation to a verbal working memory task in cocaine abusers (n=16) and healthy controls (n=16). Compared to controls, cocaine abusers showed: (1) hypoactivation in the mesencephalon, where dopamine neurons are located, as well as the thalamus, a brain region involved in arousal; (2) larger deactivation in dopamine projection  regions (putamen, anterior cingulate, parahippocampal gyrus, and amygdala); and (3) hyperactivation in cortical regions involved with attention (prefrontal and parietal cortices), which probably reflects increased attention and control processes as compensatory mechanisms. Furthermore, the working memory load activation was lower in the prefrontal and parietal cortices in cocaine abusers when compared with controls, which might reflect limited network capacity. These  abnormalities were accentuated in the cocaine abusers with positive urines for cocaine at time of study (as compared to cocaine abusers with negative urines) suggesting that the deficits may reflect in part early cocaine abstinence. These  findings provide evidence of impaired function of regions involved with executive control, attention and vigilance in cocaine abusers. This widespread neurofunctional disruption is likely to underlie the cognitive deficits during early cocaine abstinence and to reflect involvement of dopamine as well as other  neurotransmitters.
17765877	16	n = 16
17855375	16	n = 16	Evidence from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggests early structural and functional brain changes in individuals with the Huntington's disease (HD) gene mutation who are presymptomatic for the motor symptoms of the disorder (pre-HD subjects). The objective of this study was to investigate the functional neuroanatomy of verbal working memory (WM) in pre-HD subjects. By means of event-related functional MRI, we studied healthy controls (n = 16) and pre-HD subjects (n = 16) with a parametric WM paradigm comprising three different WM load levels. Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) was used to control potentially confounding brain atrophy. Although WM performance did not significantly differ between pre-HD subjects and healthy controls, pre-HD subjects showed a significantly decreased activation of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) at intermediate and high WM load levels only. This region was not affected by early cortical atrophy, as revealed by VBM. Pre-HD individuals close  to the onset of motor symptoms showed an increased activation of the left inferior parietal lobule and the right superior frontal gyrus compared with both  pre-HD subjects far from symptom onset and healthy controls. In addition, the activation level in the left DLPFC was positively correlated with the UHDRS cognitive subscore in pre-HD subjects. Our findings demonstrate that early functional brain changes in pre-HD subjects may occur in the DLPFC before manifest cortical atrophy, and support a role of this region in the expression of clinical symptoms. Compensatory brain responses in pre-HD individuals may occur with closer proximity to the onset of manifest clinical symptoms.
17855375	16	n = 16
17884110	18	n = 18	We studied the neural activation associated with anticipations of emotional pictures using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) by directly comparing certain with uncertain anticipation conditions. While being scanned with fMRI, healthy participants (n=18) were cued to anticipate and then perceive emotional stimuli having predictable (i.e., certain) emotional valences (i.e., positive and negative), given a preceding cue, as well as cued stimuli of uncertain valence (positive or negative). During anticipation of pictures with certain negative valence, activities of supracallosal anterior cingulate cortex, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, insula, and amygdala were enhanced relative activity levels that for the uncertain emotional anticipation condition. This result suggests that these brain regions are involved in anticipation of negative images, and that their activity levels may be enhanced by the certainty of anticipation. Furthermore, the supracallosal anterior cingulate cortex showed functional connectivity with the insula, prefrontal cortex, and occipital cortex during the  certain negative anticipation. These findings are consistent with an interpretation that top-down modulation, arising from anterior brain regions, is  engaged in certain negative anticipation within the occipital cortex. It is thought that the limbic system involving the amygdala, ACC, and insula, engaged emotional processes, and that the input system involving the visual cortex entered an idling state.
17963998	14	n = 14	Behaviour and fMRI brain activation patterns were compared during encoding and recognition tasks in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (n=14) and normal controls (NC) (n=14). Deep (natural vs. man-made) and shallow (color vs. black and white)  decisions were made at encoding and pictures from each condition were presented for yes/no recognition 20 min later. MCI showed less inferior frontal activation  during deep (left only) and superficial encoding (bilaterally) and in both medial temporal lobes (MTL). When performance was equivalent (recognition of words encoded superficially), MTL activation was similar for the two groups, but during recognition testing of deeply encoded items NC showed more activation in both prefrontal and left MTL region. In a region of interest analysis, the extent of activation during deep encoding in the parahippocampi bilaterally and in left hippocampus correlated with subsequent recognition accuracy for those items in controls but not in MCI, which may reflect the heterogeneity of activation responses in conjunction with different degrees of pathology burden and progression status in the MCI group.
17963998	14	n = 14
18006337	19	n = 19	BACKGROUND: We report functional and structural brain indicators that may precede the onset of dementia in individuals with Down's syndrome (DS). METHODS: Middle-aged adults with DS (n=19), a group known to be at high risk for dementia, were studied with (1) positron emission tomography (PET) to determine cerebral glucose metabolic rate (GMR), (2) structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to  determine gray matter volume (GM), and (3) ratings of potential dementia indicators based on a structured interview of caregiver observations designed to  evaluate individuals with low intelligence. RESULTS: Although none of the participants showed clinical signs of dementia, ratings of dementia indicators were correlated to both functional and structural imaging. The strongest correlations (p<.05, corrected for multiple comparisons) included the combination of higher GMR and decreased GM volume in parts of the temporal cortex, including  the parahippocampus/hippocampus, in the thalamus, caudate, and frontal lobe (BA 47). INTERPRETATION: The combination of increased GMR overlapping with less gray  matter in these areas may be consistent with a compensatory brain response to an  early stage of the disease process.
18029199	26	n = 26	An erect posture with bipedal locomotion is a characteristic feature of humans compared to other mammals. Most of our knowledge about the hierarchical network of supraspinal locomotor centers derives from animal experiments, mainly in the cat. We posed the question of whether evolutionary transition from quadrupedal to bipedal locomotion--with associated change of foreleg function--caused reorganization of these supraspinal locomotor centers. Using functional magnetic  resonance imaging, we identified separate and distinct cerebellar and brainstem BOLD signal increases related to posture and gait during mental imagery of standing, walking, and running in healthy volunteers (n=26). Comparison with the  locomotion centers in the cat showed that these activations include the pacemakers for gait initiation and speed regulation in the interfastigial cerebellum and bilateral midbrain tegmentum (cerebellar and mesencephalic locomotor regions), their descending target regions in the pontine reticular formation, and the rhythm generators in the cerebellar vermis and paravermal cortex. Moreover, during mental imagery of stance, a BOLD signal increase was observed in the dorsal pons, reflecting an activation of the dorsal tegmental field, a locomotion-suppressing site in the cat. These results support the view that the organization of supraspinal locomotor centers was preserved during the transition to bipedal locomotion. The clinical relevance of these centers has so  far been largely neglected. However, Parkinson's disease, for example, is associated with reduced cell counts in the pedunculopontine nucleus, a part of the mesencephalic locomotor region. This association suggests that deep brain stimulation of locomotion centers may provide new therapeutic approaches for common gait disorders.
18055184	17	n = 17	Patients with schizophrenia often show verbal learning deficits that have been linked to the pathophysiology of the disorder and result in functional impairment. This study examined the biological basis of these deficits by comparing the brain response of patients with schizophrenia (n=17) to that of healthy comparison participants (n=14) during a verbal paired-associates learning task using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Brain response during new word learning was examined within and between groups in two a priori regions  of interest, the inferior frontal gyrus and hippocampus, and across the whole brain. In regions of group difference, we also examined the relationship of brain response during learning to later recall of the word pairs. Despite successful matching of levels of word-pair recall, patients' brain response during new learning was abnormal in bilateral regions within the inferior frontal gyrus, a small region in left posterior hippocampus, and other areas within the frontal, parietal and temporal cortex compared with healthy individuals. In some regions,  but not in the hippocampus, patients with the most normal brain response also remembered the most word pairs following scanning. Thus, verbal learning deficits found among patients with schizophrenia appear to be related to hypofunction of distributed brain networks.
18055184	14	n = 14
18091986	23	n = 23	BACKGROUND: Recent neuroscientific evidence suggests that empathy for pain activates similar neural representations as the first-hand experience of pain. However, empathy is not an all-or-none phenomenon but it is strongly malleable by interpersonal, intrapersonal and situational factors. This study investigated how two different top-down mechanisms - attention and cognitive appraisal - affect the perception of pain in others and its neural underpinnings. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed one behavioral (N = 23) and two functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments (N = 18). In the first fMRI experiment, participants watched photographs displaying painful needle injections, and were asked to evaluate either the sensory or the affective consequences of these injections. The role of cognitive appraisal was examined in a second fMRI experiment in which participants watched injections that only appeared to be painful as they were performed on an anesthetized hand. Perceiving pain in others activated the affective-motivational and sensory-discriminative aspects of the pain matrix. Activity in the somatosensory areas was specifically  enhanced when participants evaluated the sensory consequences of pain. Perceiving non-painful injections into the anesthetized hand also led to signal increase in  large parts of the pain matrix, suggesting an automatic affective response to the putatively harmful stimulus. This automatic response was modulated by areas involved in self/other distinction and valence attribution - including the temporo-parietal junction and medial orbitofrontal cortex. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings elucidate how top-down control mechanisms  and automatic bottom-up processes interact to generate and modulate other-oriented responses. They stress the role of cognitive processing in empathy, and shed light on how emotional and bodily awareness enable us to evaluate the sensory and affective states of others.
18091986	18	n = 18
18095280	8	n = 8	Fluid intelligence (gf) refers to abstract reasoning and problem solving abilities. It is considered a human higher cognitive factor central to general intelligence (g). The regions of the cortex supporting gf have been revealed by recent bioimaging studies and valuable hypothesis on the neural correlates of individual differences have been proposed. However, little is known about the interaction between individual variability in gf and variation in cortical activity following task complexity increase. To further investigate this, two samples of participants (high-IQ, N = 8; low-IQ, N = 10) with significant differences in gf underwent two reasoning (moderate and complex) tasks and a control task adapted from the Raven progressive matrices. Functional magnetic resonance was used and the recorded signal analyzed between and within the groups. The present study revealed two opposite patterns of neural activity variation which were probably a reflection of the overall differences in cognitive resource modulation: when complexity increased, high-IQ subjects showed a signal enhancement in some frontal and parietal regions, whereas low-IQ subjects revealed a decreased activity in the same areas. Moreover, a direct comparison between the groups' activation patterns revealed a greater neural activity in the low-IQ sample when conducting moderate task, with a strong involvement of medial and lateral frontal regions thus suggesting that the recruitment of executive functioning might be different between the groups. This  study provides evidence for neural differences in facing reasoning complexity among subjects with different gf level that are mediated by specific patterns of  activation of the underlying fronto-parietal network.
18095280	10	n = 10
18234682	66	n = 66	Human altruistic cooperativeness, one of the most important components of our highly organized society, is along with a greatly enlarged brain relative to body size a spectacular outlier in the animal world. The "social-brain hypothesis" suggests that human brain expansion reflects an increased necessity for information processing to create social reciprocity and cooperation in our complex society. The present study showed that the young adult females (n = 66) showed greater Cooperativeness as well as larger relative global and regional gray matter volumes (GMVs) than the matched males (n = 89), particularly in the social-brain regions including bilateral posterior inferior frontal and left anterior medial prefrontal cortices. Moreover, in females, higher cooperativeness was tightly coupled with the larger relative total GMV and more specifically with the regional GMV in most of the regions revealing larger in female sex-dimorphism. The global and most of regional correlations between GMV and Cooperativeness were significantly specific to female. These results suggest that sexually dimorphic factors may affect the neurodevelopment of these "social-brain" regions, leading to higher cooperativeness in females. The present findings may also have an implication for the pathophysiology of autism; characterized by severe dysfunction in social reciprocity, abnormalities in social-brain, and disproportionately low probability in females.
18234682	89	n = 89
18241895	231	n = 231	In the present study, we used fMRI to examine the influence of age on two other known risk factors for Alzheimer's disease (AD), APOE genotype and parental history of AD (FH status), during episodic encoding (ENC) and metacognitive self-appraisal (SA) paradigms. These paradigms have previously been shown to evoke activity from brain regions that are implicated in AD. First we examined the effect of age across the adult lifespan (age 18-84 years) on cerebral activity in a large sample (n=231) of cognitively healthy individuals. Next we examined a subset (n=155) on whom APOE status and FH status were known. For ENC,  we found that increasing age was associated with reduced activity in the ventral  temporal lobes and hippocampus. Our analysis of risk factors suggested that FH and age exerted independent effects, but APOE interacted with age such that APOE  e4 carriers exhibit age-related increases in activity in the hippocampus. For the metacognitive SA task, increasing age was found to be associated with reduced activity in the medial prefrontal cortex, and increased activity in the mesial temporal lobe, posterior orbital cortex and striatum. Neither AD risk factor significantly modified age-related changes in brain activity during SA. These results suggest that FH and aging are exerting independent effects in both tasks  while APOE affected the relationship with age in the hippocampus in one of the two tasks given.
18241895	155	n = 155
18308710	12	n = 12	The anatomical and functional organization of the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) is one of the most debated issues in cognitive and integrative neurosciences. The aim of this study is to determine whether the human LPFC is organized according to the domain of information, to the level of the processing  or to both of these dimensions. In order to clarify this issue, we have designed  an experimental protocol that combines a functional magnetic resonance imaging study in healthy subjects (n = 12) and a voxel-by-voxel lesion mapping study in patients with focal prefrontal lesions (n = 37) compared with normal controls (n  = 48). Each method used the same original cognitive paradigm ("the domain n-back  tasks") that tests by a cross-dimensional method the domain of information (verbal, spatial, faces) and the level of processing (from 1- to 3-back). Converging data from the 2 methods demonstrate that the left posterior LPFC is critical for the higher levels of cognitive control and is organized into functionally different subregions (Brodman's area 9/46, 6/8/9, and 44/45). These  findings argue in favor of a hybrid model of organization of the left posterior LPFC in which domain-oriented (nonspatial and spatially oriented) and cross-domain executive-dependent regions coexist, reconciling previously divergent data.
18308710	37	n = 37
18308710	48	n = 48
18350136	24	n = 24	BACKGROUND: There is growing interest in the nature of slow variations of the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal observed in functional MRI resting-state studies. In humans, these slow BOLD variations are thought to reflect an underlying or intrinsic form of brain functional connectivity in discrete neuroanatomical systems. While these 'resting-state networks' may be relatively enduring phenomena, other evidence suggest that dynamic changes in their functional connectivity may also emerge depending on the brain state of subjects during scanning. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we examined healthy subjects (n = 24) with a mood induction paradigm during two continuous fMRI recordings to assess the effects of a change in self-generated mood state (neutral to sad) on the functional connectivity of these resting-state networks (n = 24). Using independent component analysis, we identified five networks that were common to both experimental states, each showing dominant signal fluctuations in the very low frequency domain (approximately 0.04 Hz). Between the two states, we observed apparent increases and decreases in the overall functional connectivity of these networks. Primary findings included increased connectivity strength of a paralimbic network involving the dorsal anterior cingulate and anterior insula cortices with subjects' increasing sadness and decreased functional connectivity of the 'default mode network'. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings support recent studies that suggest the  functional connectivity of certain resting-state networks may, in part, reflect a dynamic image of the current brain state. In our study, this was linked to changes in subjective mood.
18350136	24	n = 24
18395472	25	n = 25	It has been hypothesized that individual differences in cognitive ageing might in part be based on the relative preservation of speed of information processing. However, the biological foundations of processing speed are not understood. Here  we compared two groups of non-demented older people who had relatively similar IQs at age 11 but differed markedly in non-verbal reasoning ability at age 70: 'cognitive sustainers' (n=25), and 'cognitive decliners' (n=15). Using an event-related fMRI design, we studied the BOLD response while they performed an inspection time task. Inspection time is a two-alternative forced choice, backward masking test of the speed of the early stages of visual information processing. Inspection time has a well-established, significant association with  higher cognitive abilities. The group of cognitive sustainers showed a pattern of BOLD activation-deactivation in response to inspection time stimulus duration differences that was similar to a healthy young sample [Deary, I.J., Simonotto, E., Meyer, M., Marshall, A., Marshall, I., Goddard, N., Watdlaw, J.M., 2004a. The functional anatomy of inspection time: an event-related fMRI study. NeuroImage 22, 1466-1479]. The group of cognitive decliners lacked these clear neural networks. The relative preservation of complex reasoning skills in old age may be associated with the preservation of the neural networks that underpin fundamental information processing in youth.
18395472	15	n = 15
18396414	10	n = 10	BACKGROUND: Functional brain imaging studies have shown deviant amygdala responses to emotional stimuli in subjects suffering from anxiety and depressive  disorder, but both hyperactivity and hypoactivity compared to healthy controls have been reported. To account for these discrepant findings, we hypothesize that genetic and environmental risk factors differently impact on amygdala functioning. METHODS: To test this hypothesis, we assessed amygdala responses to  an emotional faces paradigm during functional magnetic resonance imaging in monozygotic twin pairs discordant for the risk of anxiety and depression (n=10 pairs) and in monozygotic twin pairs concordant for high (n=7 pairs) or low (n=15 pairs) risk for anxiety and depression. RESULTS: Main effects (all faces vs. baseline) revealed robust bilateral amygdala activity across groups. In discordant twins, increased amygdala responses were found for negatively valenced stimuli (angry/anxious faces) in high-risk twins compared to their low-risk co-twins. In contrast, concordant high-risk pairs revealed blunted amygdala reactivity to both positive and negative faces compared with concordant low-risk  pairs. Post-hoc analyses showed that these findings were independent of 5-HTTLPR  genotype. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate amygdala hyperactivity in subjects who are at high risk for anxiety and depression through environmental factors and amygdala hypoactivity in those at risk mainly through genetic factors. We suggest that this result reflects a difference in baseline amygdala activation in these groups. Future imaging studies on anxiety and depression should aim to avoid admixture of subjects who are at genetic risk with those at risk due to environmental factors.
18396414	7	n = 7
18396414	15	n = 15
18440493	13	n = 13	BACKGROUND: Functional imaging studies using emotional stimuli have suggested a role for the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) in the pathophysiology of midlife depression. In contrast, the neural correlates of late-life depression (LLD), a highly prevalent but under-recognized clinical entity in which age-related brain changes might influence disease mechanisms, have not been studied in great detail. With an emotional evaluation task, we conducted a longitudinal study of vmPFC functioning in a homogeneous sample of elderly antidepressant naive female outpatients with isolated, first diagnosed mild to moderate depressive symptoms. METHODS: Neural responses of the vmPFC to the emotional evaluation of positive, negative, and neutral words were measured with  functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in LLD (n = 13) and healthy older subjects (n = 13). All patients were rescanned after approximately 7 months. RESULTS: Although there were no performance differences, compared with healthy volunteers, LLD patients showed a decreased response to negative compared with positive stimuli in the vmPFC. This altered pattern was positively correlated with symptom severity. At follow-up, the attenuated neural response in the vmPFC  had "normalized," accompanied by a significant improvement in symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate vmPFC dysfunction as a biological state marker of geriatric depression. Furthermore, our data underline the pathological  significance of mild to moderate LLD and highlight the usefulness of functional neuroimaging for evaluating remission processes in this specific depression subtype.
18440493	13	n = 13
18476766	10	n = 10	The present study used functional magnetic resonance imaging to delineate cortical networks that are activated when objects or spatial locations encoded either visually (visual encoding group, n=10) or haptically (haptic encoding group, n=10) had to be retrieved from long-term memory. Participants learned associations between auditorily presented words and either meaningless objects or locations in a 3-D space. During the retrieval phase one day later, participants  had to decide whether two auditorily presented words shared an association with a common object or location. Thus, perceptual stimulation during retrieval was always equivalent, whereas either visually or haptically encoded object or location associations had to be reactivated. Moreover, the number of associations fanning out from each word varied systematically, enabling a parametric increase  of the number of reactivated representations. Recall of visual objects predominantly activated the left superior frontal gyrus and the intraparietal cortex, whereas visually learned locations activated the superior parietal cortex of both hemispheres. Retrieval of haptically encoded material activated the left  medial frontal gyrus and the intraparietal cortex in the object condition, and the bilateral superior parietal cortex in the location condition. A direct test for modality-specific effects showed that visually encoded material activated more vision-related areas (BA 18/19) and haptically encoded material more motor and somatosensory-related areas. A conjunction analysis identified supramodal and material-unspecific activations within the medial and superior frontal gyrus and  the superior parietal lobe including the intraparietal sulcus. These activation patterns strongly support the idea that code-specific representations are consolidated and reactivated within anatomically distributed cell assemblies that comprise sensory and motor processing systems.
18476766	10	n = 10
18479820	9	n = 9	This event-related functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging study examined the differential neural activities associated with a Risky-Gains task in 18 healthy individuals of high (n=9) or low (n=9) impulsiveness, according to their scores on the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS). The neural activities of people belonging to the high and low impulsiveness groups were monitored by a 3T MRI scanner while they were performing the Risky-Gains task. We demonstrated that a stronger activation in the insula-orbitofrontal-parietal regions was found in the high impulsiveness group compared to the low impulsiveness group. However, the levels of activation in the lateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate regions did not differ between the two groups. The findings suggest that the neural substrates of comprehension of cognitive and affective information associated with risk-taking decision making may vary according to the impulsiveness among healthy individuals.
18479820	9	n = 9
18485420	15	n = 15	Recent studies have suggested an uneven profile of executive dysfunction in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). For example, some authors have reported deficits on newly developed tests of executive function sensitive to rostral prefrontal function, despite spared, or even superior, performance on other tests. We investigated the performance of a group of high-functioning participants with ASD (N=15) and an age- and IQ-matched control group (N=18) on two executive function  tests, whilst undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Behaviourally, there were no significant differences between the two groups. In a classical test of executive function (random response generation), BOLD signal differed between the groups in the cerebellum but not in the frontal lobes. However, on a new test of executive function (selection between stimulus-oriented and stimulus-independent thought), the ASD group exhibited significantly greater  signal-change in medial rostral prefrontal cortex (especially Brodmann Area 10) in the comparison of stimulus-oriented versus stimulus-independent attention. In  addition, the new test (but not the classical test) provided evidence for abnormal functional organisation of medial prefrontal cortex in ASD. These results underline the heterogeneity of different tests of executive function, and suggest that executive functioning in ASD is associated with task-specific functional change.
18485420	18	n = 18
18485743	30	n = 30	Previous studies have delineated the neural processes of motor response inhibition during a stop signal task, with most reports focusing on the cortical  mechanisms. A recent study highlighted the importance of subcortical processes during stop signal inhibition in 13 individuals and suggested that the subthalamic nucleus (STN) may play a role in blocking response execution (Aron and Poldrack, 2006. Cortical and subcortical contributions to Stop signal response inhibition: role of the subthalamic nucleus. J Neurosci 26, 2424-2433).  Here in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study we replicated the finding of greater activation in the STN during stop (success or error) trials, compared to go trials, in a larger sample of subjects (n=30). However, since a contrast between stop and go trials involved processes that could be distinguished from response inhibition, the role of subthalamic activity during stop signal inhibition remained to be specified. To this end we followed an alternative strategy to isolate the neural correlates of response inhibition (Li  et al., 2006a. Imaging response inhibition in a stop signal task--neural correlates independent of signal monitoring and post-response processing. J Neurosci 26, 186-192). We compared individuals with short and long stop signal reaction time (SSRT) as computed by the horse race model. The two groups of subjects did not differ in any other aspects of stop signal performance. We showed greater activity in the short than the long SSRT group in the caudate head during stop successes, as compared to stop errors. Caudate activity was positively correlated with medial prefrontal activity previously shown to mediate stop signal inhibition. Conversely, bilateral thalamic nuclei and other parts of  the basal ganglia, including the STN, showed greater activation in subjects with  long than short SSRT. Thus, fMRI delineated contrasting roles of the prefrontal-caudate and striato-thalamic activities in mediating motor response inhibition.
18534991	60	n = 60	Although most functional neuroimaging studies examine task effects, interest intensifies in the "default" resting brain. Resting conditions show consistent regional activity, yet oxygen extraction fraction constancy across regions. We compared resting cerebral metabolic rates of glucose (CMRgl) measured with 18F-labeled 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose to cerebral blood flow (CBF) 15O-H2O measures, using the same positron emission tomography scanner in 2 samples (n = 60 and 30) of healthy right-handed adults. Region to whole-brain ratios were calculated for 35 standard regions of interest, and compared between CBF and CMRgl to determine perfusion relative to metabolism. Primary visual and auditory  areas showed coupling between CBF and CMRgl, limbic and subcortical regions--basal ganglia, thalamus and posterior fossa structures--were hyperperfused, whereas association cortices were hypoperfused. Hyperperfusion was higher in left than right hemisphere for most cortical and subcallosal limbic regions, but symmetric in cingulate, basal ganglia and somatomotor regions. Hyperperfused regions are perhaps those where activation is anticipated at short  notice, whereas downstream cortical modulatory regions have longer "lead times" for deployment. The novel observation of systematic uncoupling of CBF and CMRgl may help elucidate the potential biological significance of the "default" resting state. Whether greater left hemispheric hyperperfusion reflects lateral dominance needs further examination.
18559283	23	n = 23	BACKGROUND: Major depression (MDD) is characterized by altered emotion processing and deficits in cognitive control. In cognitive interference tasks, patients with MDD have shown excessive amygdala activity and under-recruitment of dorsolateral  prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of antidepressant treatment on anomalous neural activity in cognitive-control and emotion-processing circuitry. METHODS: Functional magnetic resonance imaging was  conducted on depressed patients (n=23) (both before and after antidepressant treatment) compared with matched controls (n=18) while they performed a cognitive task involving attended and unattended fear-related stimuli. RESULTS: After eight weeks of SSRI antidepressant treatment, patients with depression showed significantly increased DLPFC activity to unattended fear-related stimuli and no  longer differed from controls in either DLPFC or amygdala activity. CONCLUSIONS:  These results suggest that antidepressant treatment increases DLPFC under-activity during cognitive tasks that include emotional interference. LIMITATIONS: The sample was fairly homogeneous and this may limit generalizability.
18559283	18	n = 18
18574581	7	n = 7	Direction discrimination of a moving tactile stimulus requires intact dorsal columns and provides a sensitive clinical test of somatosensory dysfunction. Cortical mechanisms are poorly understood. We have applied tangential skin pulls  to the right lower leg during functional magnetic resonance imaging. Healthy subjects judged the direction of the skin pulls (task experiment, n = 7) or received skin pulls passively (no task experiment, n = 8). Second somatosensory cortex (S2) was activated in the task as well as no task experiment, and there was no significant difference in cortical activation between the two experiments. Within S2 nearly all subjects had prominent activations in the caudal and superficial part, i.e., in the opercular parietal (OP) area 1. S1 was activated in only one of the subjects. Thus, S2 and especially OP 1 seems to be important for processing of lateral skin stretch stimulation. The finding suggests that a lesion of this area might cause a disturbance in tactile direction discrimination which should be relevant for clinical testing.
18574581	8	n = 8
18599025	14	n = 14	Medial temporal (MTL) structures have crucial functions in episodic (EM), but also in semantic memory (SM) processing. Preoperative functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) activity within the MTL is increasingly used to predict  post-surgical memory capacities. Based on the hypothesis that EM and SM memory functions are both hosted by the MTL the present study wanted to explore the relationship between SM related activations in the MTL as assessed before and the capacity of EM functions after surgery. Patients with chronic unilateral left (n=14) and right (n=12) temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) performed a standard word list learning test pre- and postoperatively, and a fMRI procedure before the operation using a semantic decision task. SM processing caused significant bilateral MTL activations in both patient groups. While right TLE patients showed asymmetry of fMRI activation with more activation in the left MTL, left TLE patients had almost equal activation in both MTL regions. Contrasting left TLE versus right TLE patients revealed greater activity within the right MTL, whereas no significant difference was observed for the reverse contrast. Greater effect size in the MTL region ipsilateral to the seizure focus was significantly and positively correlated with preoperative EM abilities. Greater effect size in the  contralateral MTL was correlated with better postoperative verbal EM, especially  in left TLE patients. These results suggest that functional imaging of SM tasks may be useful to predict postoperative verbal memory in TLE. They also advocate a common neuroanatomical basis for SM and EM processes in the MTL.
18599025	12	n = 12
18603414	50	n = 50	The ability to think of the long-term consequences of one's behavior and use this information to guide present and future actions, commonly referred to as foresight, is a key higher-order cognitive ability that may be deficient among persons with schizophrenia and substantially limit the degree to which such individuals experience a functional recovery from the disease. This research investigated the neuroanatomical basis of foresight in schizophrenia, in order to identify potential brain regions that may underlie impaired foresight among this  population. Participants in the early course of schizophrenia or schizoaffective  disorder (N=50) were assessed using structural magnetic resonance imaging and clinician-rated measures of foresight and psychopathology. Voxel-based morphometry was used to examine the relationship between foresight and regional gray matter volume in the ventromedial prefrontal, orbitofrontal and cingulate cortices. Significant positive associations were observed between foresight and gray matter volume density in the right orbitofrontal, ventromedial prefrontal, and posterior cingulate cortices, as well as the left ventromedial prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices, after correcting for multiple comparisons. These relationships persisted after adjusting for age, gender, illness duration, and psychopathology. Better foresight was most strongly associated with increased gray matter in the right orbitofrontal/ventromedial prefrontal cortex, suggesting that reductions in gray matter volume in this region may be associated with impaired foresight in schizophrenia. Implications and directions for future research are discussed.
18612463	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: When our PC goes on strike again we tend to curse it as if it were a  human being. Why and under which circumstances do we attribute human-like properties to machines? Although humans increasingly interact directly with machines it remains unclear whether humans implicitly attribute intentions to them and, if so, whether such interactions resemble human-human interactions on a neural level. In social cognitive neuroscience the ability to attribute intentions and desires to others is being referred to as having a Theory of Mind  (ToM). With the present study we investigated whether an increase of human-likeness of interaction partners modulates the participants' ToM associated cortical activity. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By means of functional magnetic resonance imaging (subjects n = 20) we investigated cortical activity modulation during highly interactive human-robot game. Increasing degrees of human-likeness for the game partner were introduced by means of a computer partner, a functional robot, an anthropomorphic robot and a human partner. The classical iterated prisoner's dilemma game was applied as experimental task which allowed for an implicit detection of ToM associated cortical activity. During the experiment participants always played against a random sequence unknowingly to them. Irrespective of the surmised interaction partners' responses participants indicated having experienced more fun and competition in the interaction with increasing human-like features of their partners. Parametric modulation of the functional imaging data revealed a highly significant linear increase of cortical activity in the medial frontal cortex as well as in the right temporo-parietal junction in correspondence with the increase of human-likeness of the interaction partner (computer<functional robot<anthropomorphic robot<human). CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Both regions correlating with the degree of human-likeness, the medial frontal cortex and the right temporo-parietal junction, have been associated with Theory-of-Mind. The results demonstrate that  the tendency to build a model of another's mind linearly increases with its perceived human-likeness. Moreover, the present data provides first evidence of a contribution of higher human cognitive functions such as ToM in direct interactions with artificial robots. Our results shed light on the long-lasting psychological and philosophical debate regarding human-machine interaction and the question of what makes humans being perceived as human.
18653664	16	n = 16	The present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study investigated whether age-related differences in the neural correlates of successful memory encoding are modulated by memory performance. Young (mean age 22 years; N = 16) and older (mean age 69 years; N = 32) subjects were scanned while making animacy  decisions on visually presented words. Memory for the words was later assessed in a recognition test, allowing fMRI activity elicited by study words to be contrasted according to subsequent memory performance. Young and older adults exhibited equivalent subsequent memory effects (enhanced activity for later remembered items) in an extensive network that included left inferior prefrontal  cortex and anterior hippocampus. In posterior cingulate cortex, reversed subsequent memory effects (greater activity for later forgotten items) were of greater magnitude in young subjects. A voxel-of-interest analysis conducted on left and right prefrontal subsequent memory effects revealed that the effects were distributed more bilaterally in older than in young subjects, replicating previous findings. This age-related difference was confined to older subjects with relatively poor recognition performance, who were also the only group to demonstrate statistically significant right prefrontal subsequent memory effects. The findings suggest that relative preservation of memory performance with increasing age does not depend upon right prefrontal "over-recruitment."
18653664	32	n = 32
18653667	14	n = 14	Human cerebral development is remarkably protracted. Although microstructural processes of neuronal maturation remain accessible only to morphometric post-mortem studies, neuroimaging tools permit the examination of macrostructural aspects of brain development. The analysis of resting-state functional connectivity (FC) offers novel possibilities for the investigation of cerebral development. Using seed-based FC methods, we examined the development of 5 functionally distinct cingulate-based intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) in children (n = 14, 10.6 +/- 1.5 years), adolescents (n = 12, 15.4 +/- 1.2) and young adults (n=14, 22.4 +/- 1.2). Children demonstrated a more diffuse pattern of correlation with voxels proximal to the seed region of interest (ROI) ("local  FC"), whereas adults exhibited more focal patterns of FC, as well as a greater number of significantly correlated voxels at long distances from the seed ROI. Adolescents exhibited intermediate patterns of FC. Consistent with evidence for different maturational time courses, ICNs associated with social and emotional functions exhibited the greatest developmental effects. Our findings demonstrate  the utility of FC for the study of developing functional organization. Moreover,  given that ICNs are thought to have an anatomical basis in neuronal connectivity, measures of FC may provide a quantitative index of brain maturation in healthy subjects and those with neurodevelopmental disorders.
18653667	12	n = 12
18653667	14	n = 14
18672231	11	n = 11	BACKGROUND: A failure to develop normal language is one of the most common first  signs that a toddler might be at risk for autism. Currently the neural bases underlying this failure to develop language are unknown. METHODS: In this study,  functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to identify the brain regions involved in speech perception in 12 2-3-year-old children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) during natural sleep. We also recorded fMRI data from two typically developing control groups: a mental age-matched (MA) (n = 11) and a chronological age-matched (CA) (n = 12) group. During fMRI data acquisition, forward and backward speech stimuli were presented with intervening periods of no sound presentation. RESULTS: Direct statistical comparison between groups revealed significant differences in regions recruited to process speech. In comparison with their MA-matched control subjects, the ASD group showed reduced activity in an extended network of brain regions, which are recruited in typical  early language acquisition. In comparison with their CA-matched control subjects, ASD participants showed greater activation primarily within right and medial frontal regions. Laterality analyses revealed a trend toward greater recruitment  of right hemisphere regions in the ASD group and left hemisphere regions in the CA group during the forward speech condition. Furthermore, correlation analyses revealed a significant positive relationship between right hemisphere frontal and temporal activity to forward speech and receptive language skill. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that at 2-3 years, children with ASD might be on a deviant developmental trajectory characterized by a greater recruitment of right hemisphere regions during speech perception.
18672231	12	n = 12
18674627	17	n = 17	Mirror-symmetrical bimanual movement is more stable than parallel bimanual movement. This is well established at the kinematic level. We used functional MRI (fMRI) to evaluate the neural substrates of the stability of mirror-symmetrical bimanual movement. Right-handed participants (n=17) rotated disks with their index fingers bimanually, both in mirror-symmetrical and asymmetrical parallel modes. We applied the Akaike causality model to both kinematic and fMRI time-series data. We hypothesized that kinematic stability is represented by the  extent of neural "cross-talk": as the fraction of signals that are common to controlling both hands increases, the stability also increases. The standard deviation of the phase difference for the mirror mode was significantly smaller than that for the parallel mode, confirming that the former was more stable. We used the noise-contribution ratio (NCR), which was computed using a multivariate  autoregressive model with latent variables, as a direct measure of the cross-talk between both the two hands and the bilateral primary motor cortices (M1s). The mode-by-direction interaction of the NCR was significant in both the kinematic and fMRI data. Furthermore, in both sets of data, the NCR from the right hand (left M1) to the left (right M1) was more prominent than vice versa during the mirror-symmetrical mode, whereas no difference was observed during parallel movement or rest. The asymmetric interhemispheric interaction from the left M1 to the right M1 during symmetric bimanual movement might represent cortical-level cross-talk, which contributes to the stability of symmetric bimanual movements.
18767918	79	n = 79	Healthy participants (n = 79), ages 9-23, completed a delay discounting task assessing the extent to which the value of a monetary reward declines as the delay to its receipt increases. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was used to evaluate how individual differences in delay discounting relate to variation in fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) within whole-brain white matter using voxel-based regressions. Given that rapid prefrontal lobe development is occurring during this age range and that functional imaging studies have implicated the prefrontal cortex in discounting behavior, we hypothesized that differences in FA and MD would be associated with alterations in the discounting rate. The analyses revealed a number of clusters where less impulsive performance on the delay discounting task was associated with higher FA and lower MD. The clusters were located primarily in bilateral frontal and temporal lobes and were localized within white matter tracts, including portions  of the inferior and superior longitudinal fasciculi, anterior thalamic radiation, uncinate fasciculus, inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, corticospinal tract, and splenium of the corpus callosum. FA increased and MD decreased with age in the majority of these regions. Some, but not all, of the discounting/DTI associations remained significant after controlling for age. Findings are discussed in terms of both developmental and age-independent effects of white matter organization on discounting behavior.
18781590	16	n = 16	The mirror neuron system (MNS) is considered crucial for human imitation and language learning and provides the basis for the development of empathy and mentalizing. Alexithymia (ALEX), which refers to deficiencies in the self-awareness of emotional states, has been reported to be associated with poor  ability in various aspects of social cognition such as mentalizing, cognitive empathy, and perspective-taking. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we measured the hemodynamic signal to examine whether there are functional differences in the MNS activity between participants with ALEX (n = 16) and without ALEX (n = 13), in response to a classic MNS task (i.e., the observation of video clips depicting goal-directed hand movements). Both groups showed increased neural activity in the premotor and the parietal cortices during observation of hand actions. However, activation was greater for the ALEX group than the non-ALEX group. Furthermore, activation in the left premotor area was negatively correlated with perspective-taking ability as assessed with the interpersonal reactivity index. The signal in parietal cortices was negatively correlated with cognitive facets assessed by the stress coping inventory and positively correlated with the neuroticism scale from the NEO five factor personality scale. In addition, in the ALEX group, activation in the right superior parietal region showed a positive correlation with the severity of ALEX  as measured by a structured interview. These results suggest that the stronger MNS-related neural response in individuals scoring high on ALEX is associated with their insufficient self-other differentiation.
18781590	13	n = 13
18799601	105	n = 105	Two functionally distinct, and potentially competing, brain networks have been recently identified that can be broadly distinguished by their contrasting roles  in attention to the external world versus internally directed mentation involving long-term memory. At the core of these two networks are the dorsal attention system and the hippocampal-cortical memory system, a component of the brain's default network. Here spontaneous blood-oxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) signal correlations were used in three separate functional magnetic resonance imaging data sets (n = 105) to define a third system, the frontoparietal control system,  which is spatially interposed between these two previously defined systems. The frontoparietal control system includes many regions identified as supporting cognitive control and decision-making processes including lateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and inferior parietal lobule. Detailed analysis of frontal and parietal cortex, including use of high-resolution data, revealed clear evidence for contiguous but distinct regions: in general, the regions associated with the frontoparietal control system are situated between components of the dorsal attention and hippocampal-cortical memory systems. The frontoparietal control system is therefore anatomically positioned to integrate information from these two opposing brain systems.
18823235	9	n = 9	Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a tool for inducing transient disruptions of neural activity noninvasively in conscious human volunteers. In recent years, the investigative domain of TMS has expanded and now encompasses causal structure-function relationships across the whole gamut of cognitive functions and associated cortical brain regions. Consequently, the importance of  how to determine the target stimulation site has increased and a number of alternative methods have emerged. Comparison across studies is precluded because  different studies necessarily use different tasks, sites, TMS conditions, and have different goals. Here, therefore, we systematically compare four commonly used TMS coil positioning approaches by using them to induce behavioral change in a single cognitive study. Specifically, we investigated the behavioral impact of  right parietal TMS during a number comparison task, while basing TMS localization either on (i) individual fMRI-guided TMS neuronavigation, (ii) individual MRI-guided TMS neuronavigation, (iii) group functional Talairach coordinates, or  (iv) 10-20 EEG position P4. We quantified the exact behavioral effects induced by TMS using each approach, calculated the standardized experimental effect sizes, and conducted a statistical power analysis in order to calculate the optimal sample size required to reveal statistical significance. Our findings revealed a  systematic difference between the four approaches, with the individual fMRI-guided TMS neuronavigation yielding the strongest and the P4 stimulation approach yielding the smallest behavioral effect size. Accordingly, power analyses revealed that although in the fMRI-guided neuronavigation approach five  participants were sufficient to reveal a significant behavioral effect, the number of necessary participants increased to n = 9 when employing MRI-guided neuronavigation, to n = 13 in case of TMS based on group Talairach coordinates, and to n = 47 when applying TMS over P4. We discuss these graded effect size differences in light of the revealed interindividual variances in the actual target stimulation site within and between approaches.
18823235	13	n = 13
18823235	47	n = 47
18838100	161	n = 161	In this study, we examined whether the Met allele of the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism is associated with selective disruptions to task-relevant information processing. In 475 non-clinical participants for whom BDNF genotype status was determined we used the 'IntegNeuro' computerized battery of neuropsychological tests to assess cognitive performance, an auditory oddball task to elicit the P300 event-related potential (ERP) and, in smaller subsets of  these subjects, high resolution structural MRI imaging to quantify fronto-hippocampal grey matter (n=161), and functional magnetic resonance imaging to assess fronto-hippocampal BOLD activation (n=37). Met/Met (MM) homozygotes had higher verbal recall errors, in the absence of differences in attention, executive function, verbal ability or sensori-motor function. Further, MM homozygotes demonstrated a slowed P300 ERP during the oddball task, with corresponding alterations in hippocampal and lateral prefrontal activation, and a localized reduction in hippocampal grey matter. These results are consistent with a subtle impact of the Met allele on fronto-hippocampal systems involved in selective information processing of stimulus context and memory updating within the normal population. The findings also indicate that heritable endophenotypes such as the P300 have value in elucidating genotype-phenotype relationships.
18838100	37	n = 37
18842666	10	n = 10	This study explored sex effects on the process of risk-taking. We observed that the female participants (n = 10) showed stronger activation in the right insula and bilateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) than did the male participants (n = 12)  while they were performing in the Risky-Gains task. The female participants also  showed stronger activations in the precentral, postcentral, and paracentral regions after receiving punishment feedback. In addition, the strength of neural  activity in the insula correlated with the rate of risky behaviors for the female participants but not for the male participants. Similarly, the percent signal changes in the right OFC correlated negatively with the rate of selecting risky choices for the female group. These findings strongly suggest a sex-related influence modulating brain activity during risk-taking tasks. When taking the same level of risk, relative to men, women tend to engage in more neural processing involving the insula and the OFC to update and valuate possible uncertainty associated with risk-taking decision making. These results are consistent with the value-based decision-making model and offer insights into the possible neural mechanisms underlying the different risk-taking attitudes of men  and women.
18842666	12	n = 12
18950717	12	n = 12	Ankle dorsiflexion (ADF) is an integral component in gait. The objective of this  study was to define, using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in healthy volunteers (n=12), the brain regions that are activated during Electrical Stimulation (ES)-induced ADF movements, and compare this to the pattern of activation occurring during active and passive ADF. Concurrent electromyography (EMG) was used to monitor the tibialis anterior muscle activity so as to allow EMG-guided fMRI analysis to be performed. Patterns of cortical and sub-cortical activation in response to active, passive and ES-induced ADF movement were identified. EMG-guided fMRI analysis was shown to improve detection and reduce inter-session variance for active and ES tasks. A significantly greater number of voxels were activated during active and ES-induced ADF compared to passive ADF in contralateral primary motor (M1), primary sensory (SI), and secondary somatosensory (SII) areas, as well as in supplementary motor area (SMA) and cingulate motor areas (CMA); bilateral dorsal and ventral premotor areas and cerebellum VI. The contrast of active greater than ES-induced ADF showed increased activation in SMA, contralateral PMdr; bilateral PMvr, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and CMA; and ipsilateral cerebellum IV. Active ADF generated greater activation in brain areas responsible for motor planning, execution and visuomotor co-ordination. ES-induced activation was greater in bilateral SII and  insula than for active ADF, hypothesised to result from increased sensory integration, but also possibly due to a nociceptive component to ES.
18980863	12	n = 12	OBJECTIVE: Waiting longer to receive pain increases its perceived unpleasantness  by inducing 'dread'. However, it is not clear how unpredictability in the timing  of the impending pain stimulus interacts with dread and whether the two factors show differential effects on the neural generators of the pain-evoked response. METHODS: We manipulated the duration of anticipation of laser-induced pain independently of unpredictability of stimulus delivery timing, to observe the relative effect on P2 amplitudes of the laser-evoked potential (LEP) response and its estimated sources. RESULTS: Subjects (n=12) reported increased pain ratings after longer pain anticipation, irrespective of unpredictability in the timing of stimulus delivery. By contrast, unpredictability in stimulus timing increased the amplitude of the P2 irrespective of anticipation duration. The modulation of P2 amplitude by unpredictability was localized to midcingulate cortex (MCC) and ipsilateral secondary somatosensory (S2) areas. Greater anticipation duration increased activity in a hippocampal-insula-prefrontal network but not in MCC areas. CONCLUSIONS: Distinct neural networks contribute to the P2 and are differentially affected by pain anticipation duration and unpredictability in stimulus timing. SIGNIFICANCE: ERP research into dread should be careful to appreciate the neural generators of pain-evoked responses and their potential modulation by unpredictability.
18983833	25	n = 25	Three competing models of cognitive aging (neural compensation, capacity limitations, neural inefficiency) were examined in relation to working memory for novel non-verbal material. To accomplish this goal young (n=25) and old (n=25) participants performed a delayed item recognition (DIR) task while being scanned  with bold fMRI. The stimuli in the DIR task consisted of computer-generated closed-curve shapes with each shape presented only once in the testing conditions of each participant. This ensured that both the novelty and appearance of the shapes maximized visual demands and limited the extent of phonologic processing.  Behaviorally, as expected, the old participants were slower and less accurate compared to the young participants. Spatial patterns of brain activation that corresponded to load-dependent (stimulus set size ranged from 1 to 3) fMRI signal during the three phases of the DIR task (memory set presentation, retention delay, probe presentation) were evaluated in both age groups. Support for neural  compensation and capacity limitation was evident in retention delay and the probe phase, respectively. Data were inconsistent with the neural inefficiency model. The process specific support for the theories we examined is consistent with a large corpus of research showing that the substrates underlying the encoding, retention and probe phases are different. That is, cognitive aging theories can be specific to the neural networks/regions underlying the different phases of working memory. Delineating how these theories work in concert can increase knowledge of age-related effects on working memory.
18983833	25	n = 25
19015835	10	n = 10	RATIONALE: Substances of misuse (such as nicotine) are associated with increases  in activation within the mesocorticolimbic brain system, a system thought to mediate the rewarding effects of drugs of abuse. Pharmacological treatments have  been designed to reduce cigarette cravings during temporary abstinence. Exercise  has been found to be an effective tool for controlling cigarette cravings. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to assess the effect of exercise on regional brain activation in response to smoking-related images during temporary  nicotine abstinence. METHOD: In a randomized crossover design, regular smokers (n = 10) undertook an exercise (10 min moderate-intensity stationary cycling) and control (passive seating for same duration) session, following 15 h of nicotine abstinence. Following treatments, participants entered a functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scanner. Subjects viewed a random series of smoking and  neutral images for 3 s, with an average inter-stimulus-interval (ISI) of 10 s. Self-reported cravings were assessed at baseline, mid-, and post-treatments. RESULTS: A significant interaction effect (time by group) was found, with self-reported cravings lower during and following exercise. During control scanning, significant activation was recorded in areas associated with reward (caudate nucleus), motivation (orbitofrontal cortex) and visuo-spatial attention  (parietal lobe, parahippocampal, and fusiform gyrus). Post-exercise scanning showed hypo-activation in these areas with a concomitant shift of activation towards areas identified in the 'brain default mode' (Broadmanns Area 10). CONCLUSION: The study confirms previous evidence that a single session of exercise can reduce cigarette cravings, and for the first time provides evidence  of a shift in regional activation in response to smoking cues.
19097164	29	n = 29	Does impairment of cholinergic systems represent an important factor in the development of amnesic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), as a preclinical stage of Alzheimer's disease (AD)? Here we tested the hypothesis that electroencephalographic (EEG) rhythms, known to be modulated by the cholinergic system, may be particularly affected in aMCI patients with lesions along the cholinergic white-matter tracts. Eyes-closed resting EEG data were recorded in 28 healthy elderly (Nold) and 57 aMCI patients. Lesions along the cholinergic white-matter tracts were detected with fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequences on magnetic resonance imaging. The estimation of the cholinergic lesion was performed with a validated semi-automatic algorithm pipeline after registration to a stereotactic template, image integration with stereotactic masks of the cholinergic tracts, and normalization to intracranial volume. The aMCI patients were divided into two groups of high (MCI Ch+; N = 29; MMSE = 26.2) and low cholinergic damage (MCI Ch-; N = 28; MMSE = 26.6). EEG rhythms of interest were delta (2-4 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha 1 (8-10.5 Hz), alpha 2 (10.5-13 Hz), beta 1 (13-20 Hz), and beta 2 (20-30 Hz). Cortical EEG generators were estimated by LORETA software. As main results, (i) power of occipital, parietal, temporal, and limbic alpha 1 sources was maximum in Nold, intermediate  in MCI Ch-, and low in MCI Ch+ patients; (ii) the same trend was true in theta sources. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that damage to the cholinergic system is associated with alterations of EEG sources in aMCI subjects.
19097164	28	n = 28
19107748	12	n = 12	Previous studies on working memory (WM) function in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) suggested aberrant activation of  the prefrontal cortex and the cerebellum. Although it has been hypothesized that  activation differences in these regions most likely reflect aberrant frontocerebellar circuits, the functional coupling of these brain networks during cognitive performance has not been investigated so far. In this study, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and both univariate and multivariate analytic techniques were used to investigate regional activation changes and functional connectivity differences during cognitive processing in healthy controls (n = 12) and ADHD adults (n = 12). Behavioral performance during a parametric verbal WM paradigm did not significantly differ between adults with ADHD and healthy controls. During the delay period of the activation task, however, ADHD patients  showed significantly less activation in the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex  (VLPFC), as well as in cerebellar and occipital regions compared with healthy control subjects. In both groups, independent component analyses revealed a functional network comprising bilateral lateral prefrontal, striatal, and cingulate regions. ADHD adults had significantly lower connectivity in the bilateral VLPFC, the anterior cingulate cortex, the superior parietal lobule, and the cerebellum compared with healthy controls. Increased connectivity in ADHD adults was found in right prefrontal regions, the left dorsal cingulate cortex and the left cuneus. These findings suggest both regional brain activation deficits and functional connectivity changes of the VLPFC and the cerebellum as well as functional connectivity abnormalities of the anterior cingulate and the parietal cortex in ADHD adults during WM processing.
19107748	12	n = 12
19126572	26	n = 26	Social interaction is profoundly affected in the behavioural form of frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) yet there are few means of objectively assessing  this. Diagnosis of bvFTD is based on informant report, however a number of individuals with a clinical profile consistent with the disease have no imaging abnormality and seem to remain stable, with doubt about the presence of underlying neurodegenerative pathology. We aimed to quantify aspects of the behavioural disorder and link it to the underlying level of atrophy in socially relevant brain regions. We tested individuals with either bvFTD (N = 26) or Alzheimer's disease (N = 9) and 16 controls using The Awareness of Social Inference Test (TASIT) to assess their ability to identify emotion and sarcasm in video vignettes. A subset of bvFTD patients (N = 21) and controls (N = 12) were scanned using MRI within 6 months of assessment. There was marked impairment in the ability of bvFTD patients whose scans showed abnormalities to recognize sarcastic, but not sincere statements. Their capacity to interpret negative emotion was also impaired, and this appeared to be a major factor underlying the  deficit in sarcasm recognition. Clinically diagnosed bvFTD patients whose scans were normal, Alzheimer's disease patients and controls had no difficulty in appreciating both types of statement. In a multivariate imaging analysis it was shown that the sarcasm (and emotion recognition) deficit was dependent on a circuit involving the lateral orbitofrontal cortex, insula, amygdala and temporal pole, particularly on the right. Performance on a more global test of cognitive function, the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination did not have a unique association with these regions. The TASIT is an objective test of social dysfunction in bvFTD which indexes the frontotemporal volume loss in bvFTD patients and provides an objective measure for separating behavioural patients who are likely to decline from those who may remain stable. These results provide additional evidence for the role of the orbitofrontal cortex and related structures in the processing of socially relevant signals, particularly those where negative emotion recognition is important.
19126572	9	n = 9
19126572	21	n = 21
19126572	12	n = 12
19146963	18	n = 18	The present event-related fMRI study addressed the question whether retrieval-related neural activity in lateral parietal cortex is affected by the relative probability of test items. We varied the proportion of old to new items  across two test blocks, with 25% of the items being old in one block and 75% being old in the other. Prior to each block, participants (N=18) completed one of two types of study judgment on each of 108 object images. They then performed a source memory test with four response options: studied in task 1, studied in task 2, old but unsure of the study task, and new. Retrieval-related activity in regions previously identified as recollection-sensitive, including the left inferior lateral parietal cortex and bilateral medial temporal cortex, was unaffected by old/new ratio. Generic retrieval success effects--retrieval-related effects common to recognized items attracting either a correct or an incorrect source judgment--were identified in several regions of left superior parietal cortex. These effects dissociated between a middle region of the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), where activity did not interact with ratio, and regions anterior and posterior to the middle IPS where activity was sensitive to old/new ratio. The findings are inconsistent with prior proposals that retrieval-related activity in and around the left middle IPS reflects the relative salience of old  and new test items. Rather, they suggest that, as in the case of more inferior left parietal regions, retrieval-related activity in this region reflects processes directly linked to retrieval.
19150518	44	n = 44	Neuroimaging studies investigating the neural correlates of verbal fluency (VF) focused on sex differences without taking into account behavioural variation. Nevertheless, group differences in this verbal ability might account for neurocognitive differences elicited between men and women. The aim of this study  was to test sex and performance level effects and the combination of these on cerebral activation. Four samples of 11 healthy students (N=44) selected on the basis of sex and contrasted VF scores, high fluency (HF) versus low fluency (LF), performed a covert phonological VF task during scans. Within- and between-group analyses were conducted. Consistent with previous studies, for each sample, the whole-group analysis reported activation in the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), insula, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), medial frontal gyrus (mFG), superior (SPL) and inferior parietal lobules (IPL), inferior visual areas, cerebellum, thalamus and basal ganglia. Between-group analyses showed an interaction between  sexes and performances in the right precuneus, left ACC, right IFG and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). HF men showed more activation than LF ones in the right precuneus and left dlPFC. LF men showed more activation in the  right IFG than HF ones and LF women elicited more activation in the left ACC than HF ones. A sex main effect was found regardless of performance in the left inferior temporal gyrus (ITG), cerebellum, anterior and posterior cingulate cortexes and in the right superior frontal gyrus (SFG) and dlPFC, lingual gyrus and ACC, with men eliciting significantly greater activations than women. A performance main effect was found for the left ACC and the left cerebellum regardless of sex. LF subjects had stronger activations than HF ones in the ACC whereas HF subjects showed stronger activations in the cerebellum. Activity in three discrete subregions of the ACC is related to sex, performance and their interaction, respectively. Our findings emphasize the need to consider sex and performance level in functional imaging studies of VF.
19153150	9	n = 9	Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a common form of disability in children. Persistent deficits in motor control have been documented following TBI but there has been less emphasis on changes in functional cerebral activity. In the present study, children with moderate to severe TBI (n = 9) and controls (n = 17) were scanned while performing cyclical movements with their dominant and non-dominant  hand and foot according to the easy isodirectional (same direction) and more difficult non-isodirectional (opposite direction) mode. Even though the children  with TBI were shown to be less successful on various items of a clinical motor test battery than the control group, performance on the coordination task during  scanning was similar between groups, allowing a meaningful interpretation of their brain activation differences. fMRI analysis revealed that the TBI children  showed enhanced activity in medial and anterior parietal areas as well as posterior cerebellum as compared with the control group. Brain activation generally increased during the non-isodirectional as compared with the isodirectional mode and additional regions were involved, consistent with their differential degree of difficulty. However, this effect did not interact with group. Overall, the findings indicate that motor impairment in TBI children is associated with changes in functional cerebral activity, i.e. they exhibit compensatory activation reflecting increased recruitment of neural resources for  attentional deployment and somatosensory processing.
19153150	17	n = 17
19153155	29	n = 29	Inappropriate social behaviours are early and distinctive symptoms of the temporal and frontal variants of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Knowledge of social behaviour is essential for appropriate social conduct. It is  unknown, however, in what way this knowledge is degraded in FTLD. In a recent functional MRI study, we have identified a right-lateralized superior anterior temporal lobe (aTL) region showing selective activation for 'social concepts' (i.e. concepts describing social behaviour: e.g. 'polite', 'stingy') as compared  with concepts describing less socially relevant animal behaviour ('animal function concepts': e.g. 'trainable', 'nutritious'). In a further fMRI study, superior aTL activation was independent of the context of actions and feelings associated with these social concepts. Here, we investigated whether the right superior sector of the aTL is necessary for context-independent knowledge of social concepts. We assessed neuronal glucose uptake using 18-fluoro-deoxy-glucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and a novel semantic discrimination task which probed knowledge of social and animal function concepts in patients with FTLD (n = 29) and corticobasal syndrome (n = 18). FTLD  and corticobasal syndrome groups performed equally poorly on animal function concepts but FTLD patients showed more pronounced impairments on social concepts  than corticobasal syndrome patients. FTLD patients with right superior aTL hypometabolism, as determined on individual ROI analyses, were significantly more impaired on social concepts than on animal function concepts. FTLD patients with  selective impairments for social concepts, as determined on individual neuropsychological profiles, showed higher levels of inappropriate social behaviours ('disinhibition') and demonstrated more pronounced hypometabolism in the right superior aTL, the left temporal pole and the right lateral orbitofrontal and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex as compared with FTLD patients showing selective impairments of animal function concepts. Combining both FTLD subgroup analyses, based on anatomical and neuropsychological criteria, by using  inclusive masks, revealed the right superior aTL as associated with selective impairments of social concepts in both analyses. These results corroborate the hypothesis that the right aTL is necessary for representing conceptual social knowledge. Further, we provide first evidence for the potential importance of conceptual social knowledge impairments as contributing to behavioural symptoms of FTLD.
19153155	18	n = 18
19200077	11	n = 11	When damaged perinatally, as in congenital hemiplegia (CH), the corticospinal tract usually undergoes an extensive reorganization, such as the stabilization of normally transient projections to the ipsilateral spinal cord. Whether the reorganization of the corticospinal projections occurring in CH patients is also  accompanied by a topographical rearrangement of the hand representations in the primary motor cortex (M1) remains unclear. To address this issue, we mapped, for  both hands, the representation of the first dorsal interosseous muscle (1DI) in 12 CH patients by using transcranial magnetic stimulation co-registered onto individual three-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging; these maps were compared with those gathered in age-matched controls (n = 11). In the damaged hemisphere of CH patients, the representation of the paretic 1DI was either found in the hand knob of M1 (n = 5), shifted caudally (n = 5), or missing (n = 2). In the intact hemisphere of six CH patients, an additional, ipsilateral, representation  of the paretic 1DI was found in the hand knob, where it overlapped exactly the representation of the non-paretic 1DI. In the other six CH patients, the ipsilateral representation of the paretic 1DI was either shifted caudally (n = 2) or was lacking (n = 4). Surprisingly, in these two subgroups of patients, the representation of the contralateral non-paretic 1DI was found in a more medio-dorsal position than in controls. The present study demonstrates that, besides the well-known reorganization of the corticospinal projections, early brain injuries may also lead to a topographical rearrangement of the representations of both the paretic and non-paretic hands in M1.
19200077	5	n = 5
19200077	5	n = 5
19200077	2	n = 2
19200077	2	n = 2
19200077	4	n = 4
19288464	19	n = 19	Visual tuning for words vs. symbol strings yields complementary increases of fast occipito-temporal activity (N1 or N170) in the event-related potential (ERP), and posterior-anterior gradients of increasing word-specific activity with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in the visual word form system (VWFS). However, correlation of these coarse ERP and fMRI tuning responses seems limited to the most anterior part of the VWFS in adult and adolescent readers (Brem et al. [ 2006]: Neuroimage 29:822-837). We thus focused on fMRI tuning gradients of young  readers with their more pronounced ERP print tuning, and compared developmental aspects of ERP and fMRI response tuning in the VWFS. Children (10.3 y, n = 19), adolescents (16.2 y, n = 13) and adults (25.2 y, n = 18) were tested with the same implicit reading paradigm using counterbalanced ERP and fMRI imaging. The word-specific occipito-temporal N1 specialization, its corresponding source activity, as well as the integrated source activity (0-700 ms) were most prominent in children and showed a marked decrease with age. The posterior-anterior fMRI gradient of word-specific activity instead which was fully established in children did not develop further, but exhibited a dependence on reading skills independent of age. To conclude, prominent developmental dissociation of the ERP and fMRI tuning patterns emerged despite convergent VWFS  localization. The ERP response may selectively reflect fast visual aspects of print specialization, which become less important with age, while the fMRI response seems dominated by integrated task- and reading-related activations in the same regions.
19288464	13	n = 13
19288464	18	n = 18
19321651	20	n = 20	There is emerging evidence that alterations in dopaminergic transmission can influence semantic processing, yet the neural mechanisms involved are unknown. The influence of levodopa (L-DOPA) on semantic priming was investigated in healthy individuals (n = 20) using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging with a randomized, double-blind crossover design. Critical prime-target pairs consisted of a lexical ambiguity prime and 1) a target related to the dominant meaning of the prime (e.g., bank-money), 2) a target related to the subordinate meaning (e.g., fence-sword), or 3) an unrelated target (e.g., ball-desk). Behavioral data showed that both dominant and subordinate meanings were primed on placebo. In contrast, there was preserved priming of dominant meanings and no significant priming of subordinate meanings on L-DOPA, the latter associated with decreased anterior cingulate and dorsal prefrontal cortex activity. Dominant meaning activation on L-DOPA was associated with increased activity in the left rolandic operculum and left middle temporal gyrus. These findings suggest that L-DOPA enhances frequency-based semantic focus via prefrontal and temporal modulation of automatic semantic priming and through engagement of anterior cingulate mechanisms supporting attentional/controlled priming.
19349231	7	n = 7	Functional MRI studies on humans with BOLD contrast are increasingly performed at high static magnetic field in order to exploit the increased sensitivity. The downside of high-field fMRI using the gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (GE-EPI)  method is that images are typically very strongly affected by image distortion and signal loss. It has been demonstrated at 1.5 T and 3 T that image artifacts can be reduced and functional sensitivity simultaneously increased by the use of  parallel-accelerated multi-echo EPI. Using sensitivity measurements and an activation study with a cognitive Stroop task experiment (N=7) we here investigate the potential of this method at 7 T. The main findings are: (a) image quality compared to a conventional acquisition scheme is drastically improved; (b) according to CNR estimations the average BOLD sensitivity increases by 6.1+/-4.3% and 13.9+/-5.5% for unweighted and CNR-weighted echo summation, respectively; (c) both functional signal changes and sensitivity in the multi-echo data do not exhibit a pronounced dependence on TE. The consequence is  that (d) in practice the performance of simple echo summation at very high field  is comparable to that based on a CNR filter. Finally, (e) temporal noise observed in the different echo time courses is not strongly correlated, thus explaining why echo summation is advantageous. The results at typical spatial resolution show that multi-echo EPI acquisition leads to considerable artifact reduction and sensitivity gains, making it superior to conventional GE-EPI for fMRI at 7 T.
19357393	10	n = 10	Neurodevelopmental changes regarding interference and magnitude processing were assessed in 3 age groups (children, n = 10; young adults, n = 11; elderly participants, n = 9) by using an functional magnetic resonance imaging version of the numerical Stroop task. Behaviorally, comparable distance and size congruity effects were found in all 3 age groups. Distance effects were most pronounced in  the more difficult numerical task, whereas size congruity effects were comparable across tasks. In response to interference, an age-linear trend in the pattern of  activation in left and right prefrontal and left middle temporal regions of the brain was observed. This implicates that with increasing age interference control requires increasing effort (possible explanations for children's relatively lower interference effects are provided). In contrast, the distance effect produced a negative linear trend in right prefrontal, supplementary motor area, and intraparietal cortex. This suggests that relative to old adults, children and young adults had to recruit a larger network upon processing magnitude. The latter findings are even more remarkable considering that the behavioral effects  were similar across groups. In summary, the developmental trajectories of interference control and magnitude processing differ, although these cognitive functions activate partially overlapping brain regions.
19357393	11	n = 11
19357393	9	n = 9
19375076	12	n = 12	Combining structural equation modeling (SEM) and voxel-based morphometry (VBM), this study investigated the interactions among neural structures in the basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuit (BGTC) in the left hemisphere of stuttering and non-stuttering speakers. Stuttering speakers (n=12) and non-stuttering controls (n=12) were scanned while performing a picture-naming task and a passive-viewing  (baseline) task. Results showed significant differences between stuttering and non-stuttering speakers in both effective connectivity and anatomical structures  in the BGTC in the left brain. Specifically, compared to non-stuttering speakers, stuttering speakers showed weaker negative connectivity from the left posterior middle temporal gyrus (PMTG) to the putamen, but stronger positive connectivity from the putamen to the thalamus, from the thalamus to the PMTG and anterior supplementary motor area (preSMA), and from the anterior superior temporal gyrus  (ASTG) to the preSMA. Accompanying such altered connectivity were anatomical differences: compared to non-stuttering controls, stuttering speakers showed more grey matter (GM) volume concentration in the left putamen, less GM volume concentration in the left medial frontal gyrus and ASTG, and less white matter volume concentration underlying the left posterior superior temporal gyrus inside the BGTC. These results shed significant light on the neural mechanisms (in terms of both functional connectivity and neural anatomy) of stuttering.
19375076	12	n = 12
19376243	28	n = 28	Several studies have described poorer performance in executive-type tasks in individuals who were born very preterm compared to controls. As there is evidence that high-order executive functions may be underpinned by neuronal activity in frontal-striatal circuits, we investigated with functional MRI a group of young adults who were born very preterm (n=28, gestational age <33 weeks) and controls  (n=26) in order to detect possible alterations in brain activation during completion of a letter fluency task with differential cognitive loading ("easy" and "hard" letter trials). Structural MRI data were also collected to clarify whether any functional changes were associated with structural brain volume changes. Group membership, level of task difficulty and gestational age had significant effects on brain activation. In the absence of significant between-group differences in task performance, during "easy" letter trials, very  preterm-born individuals showed attenuated activation in anterior cingulate gyrus, right caudate nucleus and left inferior frontal gyrus compared to controls. During "hard" letter trials, very preterm-born individuals showed both  decreased and increased BOLD signal compared to controls, in left middle frontal  and anterior cingulate gyrus, respectively. BOLD signal in caudate nucleus and anterior cingulate gyrus, in regions with peaks close to areas where between-group differences were observed, was linearly associated with gestational age. Analysis of structural MRI data showed altered grey matter distribution in the preterm-born group compared to controls. However, fMRI results were only partly explained by structural changes, and may reflect processes of functional plasticity for the successful completion of executive-type operations.
19376243	26	n = 26
19384886	117	n = 117	The ability to detect and learn contingencies between fearful stimuli and their predictive cues is an important capacity to cope with the environment. Contingency awareness refers to the ability to verbalize the relationships between conditioned and unconditioned stimuli. Although there is a heated debate  about the influence of contingency awareness on conditioned fear responses, neural correlates behind the formation process of contingency awareness have gained only little attention in human fear conditioning. Recent animal studies indicate that the ventral striatum (VS) could be involved in this process, but in human studies the VS is mostly associated with positive emotions. To examine this question, we reanalyzed four recently published classical fear conditioning studies (n = 117) with respect to the VS at three distinct levels of contingency  awareness: subjects, who did not learn the contingencies (unaware), subjects, who learned the contingencies during the experiment (learned aware) and subjects, who were informed about the contingencies in advance (instructed aware). The results  showed significantly increased activations in the left and right VS in learned aware compared to unaware subjects. Interestingly, this activation pattern was only found in learned but not in instructed aware subjects. We assume that the VS is not involved when contingency awareness does not develop during conditioning or when contingency awareness is unambiguously induced already prior to conditioning. VS involvement seems to be important for the transition from a contingency unaware to a contingency aware state. Implications for fear conditioning models as well as for the contingency awareness debate are discussed.
19398308	13	n = 13	We applied a covariance-based multivariate analysis to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data to investigate abnormalities in working memory (WM) systems in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Patients (n=13) and matched controls (n=12) were scanned with fMRI while updating or maintaining  trauma-neutral verbal stimuli in WM. A multivariate statistical analysis was used to investigate large-scale brain networks associated with these experimental tasks. For the control group, the first network reflected brain activity associated with WM updating and principally involved bilateral prefrontal and bilateral parietal cortex. Controls' second network was associated with WM maintenance and involved regions typically activated during storage and rehearsal of verbal material, including lateral premotor and inferior parietal cortex. In contrast, PTSD patients appeared to activate a single fronto-parietal network for both updating and maintenance tasks. This is indicative of abnormally elevated activity during WM maintenance and suggests inefficient allocation of resources for differential task demands. A second network in PTSD, which was not activated  in controls, showed regions differentially activated between WM tasks, including  the anterior cingulate, medial prefrontal cortex, fusiform and supplementary motor area. These activations may be linked to hyperarousal and abnormal reactivity, which are characteristic of PTSD.
19398308	12	n = 12
19419772	30	n = 30	OBJECTIVES: Although brain structural deficits have been repeatedly associated with bipolar disorder (BD), inconsistency in morphometric results has been a feature of neuroimaging studies. We hypothesize that this discrepancy is related  to the heterogeneity of BD, and examine the question of whether or not more homogeneous clinical subgroups display a more coherent pattern of morphometric abnormalities. METHODS: In a case-control design, we examined differences in gray matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentration in 42  BD patients and 42 healthy matched controls using optimized voxel-based morphometry (VBM). Subgroup analyses of patients with a lifetime history of psychotic symptoms (BDP, n=30) and patients with mood-incongruent psychotic symptoms in the form of persecutory delusions (BDPD, n=15) were performed to accord with previous genetic findings. RESULTS: Analysis of the total BD sample was largely inconclusive, but the BDPD patient subgroup displayed a widespread pattern of significant decreases in GM concentration in the dorsolateral prefrontal (DLPFC), temporal and cingulate cortices, and a significant CSF increase in the adjacent outer ventricular sulci. Comparison of BDPD patients versus BD and BDP patients without persecutory delusions revealed a significant GM decrease in the left DLPFC for the former group. CONCLUSIONS: BDPD show pronounced structural abnormalities of the prefrontal and temporal lobes which are similar to the deficits previously reported for schizophrenia (SCZ). Our findings suggest that stratification based solely on psychotic symptoms is insufficient for the differentiation of BD into biologically meaningful subgroups, but also question the pathophysiological validity of the dichotomy in  classification between schizophrenia and BD.
19419772	15	n = 15
19426812	14	n = 14	BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Determining the gene that plays a key role in brain-gut interactions is a crucial step for clarifying the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). We previously reported that the 5-hydroxytryptamine transporter gene-linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) is related to anxiety in subjects with IBS. The amygdala is more activated during fearful face recognition in individuals with the s allele of 5-HTTLPR. Here, we tested our hypothesis that 5-HTTLPR differentially activates brain regions with colorectal distention in humans. METHODS: We enrolled 28 subjects without any organic disease. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee and all subjects gave written informed consent. DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood. The genotype of 5-HTTLPR was determined using polymerase chain reaction. Age, sex, diagnosis-matched individuals with the s/s genotype (n=14) and individuals with the l allele (genotypes l/s, l/l, l/extra-l, n=14) were compared. A barostat bag was inserted  to the colorectum and was intermittently inflated with no (0 mm Hg), mild (20 mm  Hg), or intense (40 mm Hg) stimulation on a random order. Radioactive H2[(15-)O]  saline was injected at bag inflation and then positron emission tomography was performed. Changes in rCBF were analyzed using statistical parametric mapping. RESULTS: Individuals with the s/s genotype showed a significantly larger increase in rCBF by colorectal distention from 0 mm Hg to 40 mm Hg than individuals with the l allele. The significantly more activated brain regions in individuals with  the s/s genotype were the left anterior cingulate cortex and right parahippocampal gyrus (p<0.0001). The increase in rCBF by colorectal distention of 20 mm Hg compared with 0 mm Hg was significantly larger in the left orbitofrontal cortex of individuals with the s/s genotype than that of individuals with the l allele (p<0.0001). CONCLUSION: These data suggest that individuals with a weak function of serotonin transporter respond to gut signals  more in emotion-regulating brain regions. Functional gene polymorphism may partially predict the individual effect of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor on visceral pain.
19426812	14	n = 14
19428399	18	n = 18	Functional neuroimaging studies have reported that the neural correlates of retrieval success (old>new effects) are larger and more widespread in older than  in young adults. In the present study we investigated whether this pattern of age-related 'over-recruitment' continues into advanced age. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), retrieval-related activity from two groups (N=18 per group) of older adults aged 84-96 years ('old-old') and 64-77 years ('young-old') was contrasted. Subjects studied a series of pictures, half of which were presented once, and half twice. At test, subjects indicated whether each presented picture was old or new. Recognition performance of the old-old subjects for twice-studied items was equivalent to that of the young-old subjects for once-studied items. Old>new effects common to the two groups were identified  in several cortical regions, including medial and lateral parietal and prefrontal cortex. There were no regions where these effects were of greater magnitude in the old-old group, and thus no evidence of over-recruitment in this group relative to the young-old individuals. In one region of medial parietal cortex, effects were greater (and only significant) in the young-old group. The failure to find evidence of over-recruitment in the old-old subjects relative to the young-old group, despite their markedly poorer cognitive performance, suggests that age-related over-recruitment effects plateau in advanced age. The findings for the medial parietal cortex underscore the sensitivity of this cortical region to increasing age.
19433416	22	n = 22	We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to determine whether depressed (vs non-depressed) adults showed differences in cortical activation in  response to stimuli representing personal goals. Drawing upon regulatory focus theory as well as previous research, we predicted that depressed patients would manifest attenuated left orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) activation in response to their own promotion goals as well as exaggerated right OFC activation in response to their own prevention goals. Unmedicated adults with major depression (n = 22)  and adults with no history of affective disorder (n = 14) completed questionnaires and a personal goal interview. Several weeks later, they were scanned during a judgment task which (unknown to them) included stimuli representing their promotion and prevention goals. Both groups showed similar patterns of task-related activation. Consistent with predictions, patients showed significantly decreased left OFC and increased right OFC activation compared to controls on trials in which they were exposed incidentally to their promotion and prevention goals, respectively. The results suggest that depression involves dysfunction in processing two important types of personal goals. The findings extend models of the etiology of depression to incorporate cognitive and motivational processes underlying higher order goal representation and ultimately may provide an empirical basis for treatment matching.
19433416	14	n = 14
19446647	55	n = 55	The INTEGRATE Model draws on the framework of 'integrative neuroscience' to bring together brain-body and behavioral concepts of emotion, thinking and feeling and  their regulation. The key organizing principle is the drive to 'minimize danger and maximize reward' that determines what is significant to us at each point in time. Traits of 'negativity bias' reflect the tendency to perceive danger rather  than reward related information, and this bias influences emotion, thinking and feeling processes. Here, we examined a self-report measure of Negativity Bias in  relation to its impact on brain and body correlates of emotion processing. The contributions of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT-LPR) allelic variants and early life stress to both negativity bias and these correlates were also examined. Data were accessed in collaboration with the Brain Resource International Database (BRID) which provides standardized data across these domains of measurement. From an initial sample of 303 nonclinical subjects from the BRID, subjects scoring one standard deviation below (n=55) and above (n=47) the mean on the measure of negativity bias were identified as 'Negativity Bias' and 'Positivity Bias' groups for analysis, respectively. These subjects had been genotyped for 5-HTT-LPR Short allele versus LL homozygote status, and completed the early life stress scale, and recording of startle responses and heart rate for conscious and nonconscious  fear conditions. A matched subset (n=39) of BRID subjects completed functional MRI with the same facial emotion tasks. The Negativity Bias (compared to Positivity Bias) group was distinguished by both arousal and brain function correlates: higher startle amplitude, higher heart rate for conscious and nonconscious fear conditions, and heightened activation in neural circuitry for both fear conditions. Regions of heightened activation included brainstem and bilateral amygdala, anterior cingulate and ventral and dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) for conscious fear, and brainstem and right-sided amygdala, anterior cingulate and ventral, mPFC for nonconscious fear. The 5-HTT-LPR Short allele (versus LL) conferred a similar pattern of arousal and neural activation.  For those with the 5-HTT-LPR Short allele, the addition of early life stress contributed to enhanced negativity bias, and to further effects on heart rate and neural activation for nonconscious fear in particular. These findings suggest that traits of negativity bias impact brain-body arousal correlates of fear circuitry. Both genetic variation and life stressors contribute to the impact of  negativity bias. Given that negativity bias is a feature of conditions such as depression and associated biological alterations, the findings have implications  for translation into clinical decision support.
19446647	47	n = 47
19446647	39	n = 39
19450657	7	n = 7	OBJECTIVES: We attempted to evaluate whether cortical activation resulting from hand movements is changed by transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) applied on the primary motor cortex for the hand in the human brain, using functional MRI (fMRI). METHODS: Fourteen normal subjects were recruited; subjects were randomly assigned to either the tDCS group (n=7) or the sham group (n=7). fMRI was performed with hand grasp-release movements at 1Hz before and after 20 min of intervention (the tDCS group: anodal tDCS, the sham group: sham stimulation). RESULTS: The activation of the tDCS underlying primary sensorimotor cortex (SM1) was significantly increased in the tDCS group (p<0.05). By contrast, the SM1 was significantly decreased in the sham group in terms of the voxel count and intensity (p<0.05). No subjects complained of any adverse symptoms or signs.  CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that anodal tDCS increased the cortical excitability  of the underlying motor cortex in the human brain. It seems that tDCS is an effective modality to modulate brain function.
19450657	7	n = 7
19492040	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: Recent functional MRI (fMRI) studies have demonstrated that there is  an intrinsically organized default mode network (DMN) in the resting brain, primarily made up of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC). Several previous studies have found that the DMN is minimally disturbed during different resting-state conditions with limited cognitive demand. However, this conclusion was drawn from the visual inspection of the functional connectivity patterns within the DMN and no statistical comparison was performed. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Four resting-state fMRI sessions were acquired: 1) eyes-closed (EC) (used to generate the DMN mask); 2) EC; 3) eyes-open with no fixation (EO); and 4) eyes-open with a fixation (EO-F).  The 2-4 sessions were counterbalanced across participants (n = 20, 10 males). We  examined the statistical differences in both functional connectivity and regional amplitude of low frequency fluctuation (ALFF) within the DMN among the 2-4 resting-state conditions (i.e., EC, EO, and EO-F). Although the connectivity patterns of the DMN were visually similar across these three different conditions, we observed significantly higher functional connectivity and ALFF in  both the EO and the EO-F conditions as compared to the EC condition. In addition, the first and second resting EC conditions showed significant differences within  the DMN, suggesting an order effect on the DMN activity. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings of the higher DMN connectivity and regional spontaneous activities in the resting state with the eyes open suggest that the participants might have more non-specific or non-goal-directed visual information gathering and evaluation, and mind wandering or daydreaming during the resting state with the eyes open as compared to that with the eyes closed, thus providing insights into the understanding of unconstrained mental activity within the DMN. Our results also suggest that it should be cautious when choosing the type of a resting condition and designating the order of the resting condition in multiple scanning sessions in experimental design.
19501653	13	n = 13	Neural substrates underlying psychological activation of the limbic-hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (LHPA) axis are not well understood in humans. Trauma recall (using autobiographical script-driven imagery) may provide  a model to study neural circuitry involved in LHPA axis activation to personally  threatening psychological stimuli. This study sought to identify brain activation patterns that differentiated combat veterans who mounted an LHPA response to trauma recall from those who did not. Twenty-five Vietnam combat veterans (14 with current PTSD, 11 with no PTSD history) experienced autobiographic script-driven imagery in an [(15)O] H(2)O positron emission tomography (PET) paradigm with recurrent blood sampling. Trauma recall elicited acute ACTH responses in some but not all veterans, regardless of the PTSD status and independent of emotional responses. ACTH responders (mean ACTH increase of 24+/-7 pg/ml, n=13) were compared to non-responders (mean decrease of -0.6+/-0.6 pg/ml,  n=12) in regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF). Both groups activated right insula  (BA13) in response to trauma recall. However, ACTH responders deactivated rostral mPFC (BA10)/rostral ACC (BA32), whereas non-responders activated this same mPFC region, and deactivated amygdala, hippocampus, and temporal pole. In group contrasts comparing ACTH responders to non-responders, the responders had significantly higher rCBF in right insula and right temporal pole, whereas non-responders had higher rCBF in rostral mPFC and dorsal ACC. These results support the hypotheses that right insula is involved in psychological activation  of the LHPA axis and that rostral mPFC may negatively modulate LHPA axis responses.
19501653	12	n = 12
19515831	19	n = 19	Cognitively intact older individuals at risk for developing Alzheimer's disease frequently show increased functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) brain activation presumably associated with compensatory recruitment, whereas mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients tend not to show increased activation presumably due to reduced neural reserve. Previous studies, however, have typically used episodic memory activation tasks, placing MCI participants at a performance disadvantage relative to healthy elders. In this event-related fMRI study, we employed a low effort, high accuracy semantic memory task to determine  if increased activation of memory circuits is preserved in amnestic MCI when task performance is controlled. Fifty-seven participants, aged 65-85 years, comprised  three groups (n = 19 each): amnestic MCI patients; cognitively intact older participants at risk for developing Alzheimer's disease based on having at least  one ApoE epsilon4 allele and a positive family history of Alzheimer's disease (At Risk); and cognitively intact participants without Alzheimer's disease risk factors (Control). fMRI was conducted on a 3T MR scanner while participants performed a famous name discrimination task. Participants also underwent neuropsychological testing outside the scanner; whole brain and hippocampal atrophy were assessed from anatomical MRI scans. The three groups did not differ  on demographic variables or on fame discrimination performance (>87% correct for  all groups). As expected, the amnestic MCI participants demonstrated reduced episodic memory performance. Spatial extent of activation (Fame--Unfamiliar subtraction) differentiated the three groups (Control = 0 ml, At Risk = 9.7 ml, MCI = 34.7 ml). The MCI and At Risk groups showed significantly greater per cent  signal change than Control participants in 8 of 14 functionally defined regions,  including the medial temporal lobe, temporoparietal junction, and posterior cingulate/precuneus. MCI participants also showed greater activation than Controls in two frontal regions. At Risk, but not MCI, participants showed increased activity in the left hippocampal complex; MCI participants, however, evidenced increased activity in this region when hippocampal atrophy was controlled. When performance is equated, MCI patients demonstrate functional compensation in brain regions subserving semantic memory systems that generally equals or exceeds that observed in cognitively intact individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease. This hyperactivation profile in MCI is even observed in the  left hippocampal complex, but only when the extent of hippocampal atrophy is taken into consideration.
19546156	17	n = 17	Institutional rearing is associated with neurocognitive and behavioral difficulties. Although such difficulties are thought to reflect abnormal neurologic development resulting from early social deprivation (ED) and there is  evidence for functional abnormality in children with histories of ED, the impact  of early deprivation on brain anatomy has received little study in humans. The present study utilized an objective and sensitive neuroimaging analysis technique (Tract-Based Spatial Statistics) to evaluate white matter fractional anisotropy (FA) and diffusivity in a group of right-handed children with histories of ED (n  = 17; mean age = 10.9 + 2.6 years) as compared with age-matched healthy controls  (n = 15; mean age = 11.7 + or - 2.8 years). Participants underwent magnetic resonance imaging diffusion tensor imaging sequences and comprehensive neuropsychological evaluations. Results revealed reduced FA in frontal, temporal, and parietal white matter including components of uncinate and superior longitudinal fasciculi, in children with histories of ED, providing further support for limbic and paralimbic abnormalities in children with such histories.  Furthermore, white matter abnormalities were associated with duration of time in  the orphanage and with inattention and hyperactivity scores. It is suspected that the observed white matter abnormalities are associated with multiple depriving factors (e.g., poor prenatal care, postnatal stress) associated with institutional caregiving.
19546156	15	n = 15
19551135	49	n = 49	The communication of stress/anxiety between conspecifics through chemosensory signals has been documented in many vertebrates and invertebrates. Here, we investigate how chemosensory anxiety signals conveyed by the sweat of humans (N = 49) awaiting an academic examination are processed by the human brain, as compared to chemosensory control signals obtained from the same sweat donors in a sport condition. The chemosensory stimuli were pooled according to the donation condition and administered to 28 participants (14 males) synchronously to breathing via an olfactometer. The stimuli were perceived with a low intensity and accordingly only about half of the odor presentations were detected by the participants. The fMRI results (event-related design) show that chemosensory anxiety signals activate brain areas involved in the processing of social emotional stimuli (fusiform gyrus), and in the regulation of empathic feelings (insula, precuneus, cingulate cortex). In addition, neuronal activity within attentional (thalamus, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex) and emotional (cerebellum,  vermis) control systems were observed. The chemosensory perception of human anxiety seems to automatically recruit empathy-related resources. Even though the participants could not attentively differentiate the chemosensory stimuli, emotional contagion seems to be effectively mediated by the olfactory system.
19553451	16	n = 16	Physiological evidence indicates that several brain regions, including the medial temporal lobes and prefrontal cortex (PFC), are involved in processing events that are novel or distinctive in their immediate context. However, behavioral studies that investigate whether these regions are critical for producing stimulus novelty advantages in memory are limited. For example, evidence from an  animal lesion study indicated that the PFC is involved in stimulus novelty effects, but this has not been examined in humans. In the current study, we used  a von Restorff novelty paradigm to test a large cohort of lateral PFC patients (n = 16). We found that patients with lateral PFC damage were impaired in recollection- and familiarity-based recognition, and they did not exhibit a normal memory advantage for novel compared with non-novel items. These results provide neuropsychological evidence supporting a key role for the lateral PFC in  producing stimulus novelty advantages in memory.
19555674	7	n = 7	Recent neuroimaging studies investigating neural correlates of psychological stress employ cognitive paradigms that induce a significant hormonal stress response in the scanner. The Montreal Imaging Stress Task (MIST) is one such task that combines challenging mental arithmetic with negative social evaluative feedback. Due to the block design nature of the MIST, it has not been possible thus far to investigate which brain areas respond specifically to the key components of the MIST (mental arithmetic, failure, negative social evaluation).  In the current study, we developed an event-related MIST (eventMIST) in order to  investigate which neural activation patterns are associated with performing mental arithmetic vs. processing of social evaluative threat. Data was available  from twenty healthy university students. The eventMIST induced a significant stress response in a subsample of subjects, called the responders (n=7). Direct comparison between brain activity changes in responders vs. non-responders, in response to challenging math, revealed increased activity bilaterally in dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (PFC), left temporal pole, and right dorsolateral PFC. In response to negative social evaluation, responders showed reduction of brain activity in limbic system regions (medial orbitofrontal cortex and hippocampus), which was largely lacking in non-responders. Direct comparison between the groups for this contrast did not reveal any significant difference, probably due to small number of events available. This is the first study to use  an event-related paradigm to investigate brain activity patterns in relation to challenging math and social evaluative threat separately.
19592571	40	n = 40	Multiple, segregated fronto-cerebellar circuits have been characterized in nonhuman primates using transneuronal tracing techniques including those that target prefrontal areas. Here, we used functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI) in humans (n = 40) to identify 4 topographically distinct fronto-cerebellar circuits that target 1) motor cortex, 2) dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, 3) medial prefrontal cortex, and 4) anterior prefrontal cortex. All 4 circuits were replicated and dissociated in an independent data set (n = 40). Direct comparison of right- and left-seeded frontal regions revealed contralateral lateralization in the cerebellum for each of the segregated circuits. The presence of circuits that involve prefrontal regions confirms that the cerebellum participates in networks important to cognition including a specific fronto-cerebellar circuit that interacts with the default network. Overall, the extent of the cerebellum associated with prefrontal cortex included a large portion of the posterior hemispheres consistent with a prominent role of the cerebellum in nonmotor functions. We conclude by providing a provisional map of the topography of the cerebellum based on functional correlations with the frontal cortex.
19592571	40	n = 40
19596405	32	n = 32	Hippocampal atrophy is the key marker in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease  (AD), which is associated with white matter (WM) disruption. This type of WM disruption could partly explain AD-related pathology. However, relatively little  attention has been directed toward WM disruption which may be independent of these fundamental gray matter (GM) changes in amnestic mild cognitive impairment  (aMCI) which is associated with high risk of AD. To evaluate the differences of WM integrity between aMCI patients (N=32) and healthy controls (N=31), whole-brain voxel-based methods were applied to diffusion tensor imaging. To explore the possible independence of WM changes from GM loss, an index of hippocampal atrophy was used to partial out GM effects. aMCI patients showed WM disruption in frontal lobe, temporal lobe, internal capsule, cingulate gyrus and  precuneus. The findings supported the evidence of independent patterns of degeneration in WM tracts which may co-act in the WM pathological process of aMCI patients. As aMCI is a putatively prodromal syndrome to AD, these data may assist with a better understanding of WM pathological change associated with the development of AD.
19596405	31	n = 31
19616413	88	n = 88	BACKGROUND: Neuropsychological deficits have been reported in association with first-episode psychosis (FEP). Reductions in grey matter (GM) volumes have been documented in FEP subjects compared to healthy controls. However, the possible inter-relationship between the findings of those two lines of research has been scarcely investigated. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between neuropsychological deficits and GM volume abnormalities in a population-based sample of FEP patients compared to healthy controls from the same geographical area. METHODS: FEP patients (n=88) and control subjects (n=86) were evaluated by  neuropsychological assessment (Controlled Oral Word Association Test, forward and backward digit span tests) and magnetic resonance imaging using voxel-based morphometry. RESULTS: Single-group analyses showed that prefrontal and temporo-parietal GM volumes correlated significantly (p<0.05, corrected) with cognitive performance in FEP patients. A similar pattern of direct correlations between neocortical GM volumes and cognitive impairment was seen in the schizophrenia subgroup (n=48). In the control group, cognitive performance was directly correlated with GM volume in the right dorsal anterior cingulate cortex  and inversely correlated with parahippocampal gyral volumes bilaterally. Interaction analyses with "group status" as a predictor variable showed significantly greater positive correlation within the left inferior prefrontal cortex (BA46) in the FEP group relative to controls, and significantly greater negative correlation within the left parahippocampal gyrus in the control group relative to FEP patients. CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that cognitive deficits are directly related to brain volume abnormalities in frontal and temporo-parietal cortices in FEP subjects, most specifically in inferior portions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
19616413	86	n = 86
19616413	48	n = 48
19621369	29	n = 29	Episodic memory impairment is a frequently reported symptom in schizophrenia. It  has been shown to be associated with reduced neural activity of the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Given the high heritability of schizophrenia the question  arises if alterations in brain activity are modulated by susceptibility genes and might be detectable in healthy risk allele carriers. The present study investigated the effect of the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1018381 (P1578) of the dystrobrevin-binding protein 1 (DTNBP1) on brain activity in 84 healthy subjects assessed by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while they performed an episodic memory task comprising encoding and retrieval of faces. During encoding, the group of risk allele carriers (n = 29) showed enhanced neural activity in the left middle frontal gyrus (BA 11) and bilaterally in the cuneus (BA 17, 7) when compared with the nonrisk carrier group (n = 55). During retrieval, the risk group (compared to the non risk group) showed increased right hemispheric neural activity comprising the medial frontal gyrus (BA 9), inferior frontal gyrus (BA 9), and inferior parietal lobule (BA 40). Since there were no behavioral performance differences, increased neural activity of the risk group might be interpreted as a correlate of higher effort or differing cognitive strategies in order to compensate for a genetically determined slight cognitive deficit. Interestingly, the laterality of increased prefrontal activity is in accordance with the well known hemispheric encoding/retrieval asymmetry (HERA) model of episodic memory.
19621369	55	n = 55
19621370	31	n = 31	The TREK1 gene has been linked to a depression-resistant phenotype in rodents and antidepressant response in humans, but the neural mechanisms underlying these links are unclear. Because TREK1 is expressed in reward-related basal ganglia regions, it has been hypothesized that TREK1 genetic variation may be associated  with anhedonic symptoms of depression. To investigate whether TREK1 genetic variation influences reward processing, we genotyped healthy individuals (n = 31) who completed a monetary incentive delay task during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Three genotypes previously linked to positive antidepressant response were associated with potentiated basal ganglia activity to gains, but did not influence responses to penalties or no change feedback. TREK1 genetic variations did not affect basal ganglia volume, and fMRI group differences were confirmed when accounting for self-report measures of anhedonia. In addition, the total number of "protective" TREK1 alleles was associated with stronger responses to gains in several other reward-related regions, including the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, and mesial prefrontal cortex. In control analyses, associations between basal ganglia responses to gains and functional polymorphisms in the dopamine transporter (DAT1) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) genes were also explored. Results revealed that TREK1 and DAT/COMT genotypes were independently related to basal ganglia responses to gains. These findings indicate that TREK1 genotypes are associated with individual differences in reward-related brain activity. Future studies in depressed samples should evaluate whether variation in neural responses to rewards may contribute to the association between TREK1 and antidepressant response in humans.
19631626	37	n = 37	The ability of positive and negative facial signals to influence attention orienting is crucial to social functioning. Given the dramatic developmental change in neural architecture supporting social function, positive and negative facial cues may influence attention orienting differently in relatively young or  old individuals. However, virtually no research examines such age-related differences in the neural circuitry supporting attention orienting to emotional faces. We examined age-related correlations in attention-orienting biases to positive and negative face emotions in a healthy sample (N=37; 9-40 years old) using functional magnetic resonance imaging and a dot-probe task. The dot-probe task in an fMRI setting yields both behavioral and neural indices of attention biases towards or away from an emotional cue (happy or angry face). In the full sample, angry-face attention bias scores did not correlate with age, and age did  not correlate with brain activation to angry faces. However, age did positively correlate with attention bias towards happy faces; age also negatively correlated with left cuneus and left caudate activation to a happy bias fMRI contrast. Secondary analyses suggested age-related changes in attention bias to happy faces. The tendency in younger children to direct attention away from happy faces (relative to neutral faces) was diminished in the older age groups, in tandem with increasing neural deactivation. Implications for future work on developmental changes in attention-emotion processing are discussed.
19641018	496	n = 496	The relationship between cognition and a functional polymorphism in the catechol-O-methlytransferase (COMT) gene, val108/158met, is one of debate in the  literature. Furthermore, based on the dopaminergic differences associated with the COMT val108/158met genotype, neural differences during cognition may be present, regardless of genotypic differences in cognitive performance. To investigate these issues the current study aimed to 1) examine the effects of COMT genotype using a large sample of healthy individuals (n = 496-1218) and multiple cognitive measures, and using a subset of the sample (n = 22), 2) examine whether COMT genotype effects medial temporal lobe (MTL) and frontal activity during successful relational memory processing, and 3) investigate group differences in functional connectivity associated with successful relational memory processing. Results revealed no significant group difference in cognitive  performance between COMT genotypes in any of the 19 cognitive measures. However,  in the subset sample, COMT val homozygotes exhibited significantly decreased MTL  and increased prefrontal activity during both successful relational encoding and  retrieval, and reduced connectivity between these regions compared with met homozygotes. Taken together, the results suggest that although the COMT val108/158met genotype has no effect on cognitive behavioral measures in healthy  individuals, it is associated with differences in neural process underlying cognitive output.
19641018	22	n = 22
19665877	12	n = 12	Children with autism exhibit impairment in the processing of socioemotional information. The amygdala, a core structure centrally involved in socioemotional  functioning, has been implicated in the neuropathology of autism. We collected structural and functional magnetic resonance images (MRI) in children 8 to 12 years of age with high-functioning autism (n=12) and typical development (n=15).  The functional MRI experiment involved matching facial expressions and people. Volumetric analysis of the amygdala was also performed. The results showed that children with autism exhibited intact emotion matching, while showing diminished  activation of the fusiform gyrus (FG) and the amygdala. Conversely, the autism group showed deficits in person matching amidst some FG and variable amygdala activation. No significant between-group differences in the volume of the left or right amygdala were found. There were associations between age, social anxiety and amygdala volume in the children with autism such that smaller volumes were generally associated with more anxiety and younger age. In summary, the data are  consistent with abnormalities in circuits involved in emotion and face processing reported in studies of older subjects with autism showing reductions in amygdala  activation related to emotion processing and reduced fusiform activation involved in face processing.
19665877	15	n = 15
19680553	2	n = 2	BACKGROUND: In functional magnetic resonance imaging, the brain's response to experimental manipulation is almost always assumed to be independent of endogenous oscillations. To test this, we addressed the possible interaction between cognitive task performance and endogenous fMRI oscillations in an experiment designed to answer two questions: 1) Does performance of a cognitively effortful task significantly change fractal scaling properties of fMRI time series compared to their values before task performance? 2) If so, can we relate  the extent of task-related perturbation to the difficulty of the task? METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using a novel continuous acquisition "rest-task-rest" design, we found that endogenous dynamics tended to recover their pre-task parameter values relatively slowly, over the course of several minutes, following completion of one of two versions of the n-back working memory task and that the rate of recovery was slower following completion of the more demanding (n = 2) version of the task. CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: This result supports the model that endogenous low frequency oscillatory dynamics are relevant to the brain's response to exogenous stimulation. Moreover, it suggests  that large-scale neurocognitive systems measured using fMRI, like the heart and other physiological systems subjected to external demands for enhanced performance, can take a considerable period of time to return to a stable baseline state.
19680634	9	n = 9	RATIONALE: +/-3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, "ecstasy") reportedly produces unique subjective effects, including increased sociability, feelings of  closeness with others, and reduced interpersonal defensiveness. Despite their apparent importance in recreational and potential psychotherapeutic use of MDMA,  the defining characteristics and neurobiological mechanisms of these interpersonal effects are poorly understood. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated acute effects of MDMA on self-reported sociability and neuronal activation in response to socially threatening (angry and fearful faces) and socially rewarding (happy faces) stimuli. Assessment of social threat response focused on amygdala activation, whereas assessment of social reward focused on ventral striatum activation. Healthy volunteers (N = 9) reporting past ecstasy use completed three experimental sessions, receiving MDMA (0.75 and 1.5 mg/kg) and placebo (PBO) under double-blind conditions. During peak drug effects, participants underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while viewing standardized images depicting emotional facial expressions including angry, fearful, happy, and neutral expressions. They also completed standardized self-report measures of sociability. RESULTS: MDMA (1.5 mg/kg) increased self-reported sociability compared to MDMA (0.75 mg/kg) and PBO. MDMA (1.5 mg/kg) attenuated left amygdala response to angry facial expressions compared to PBO, but MDMA did not affect amygdala reactivity to fearful expressions. MDMA (0.75 mg/kg) enhanced ventral striatum response to happy expressions relative to PBO. CONCLUSIONS: These data present the first evidence that MDMA may increase sociability in humans both by diminishing responses to threatening stimuli and enhancing responses to rewarding social signals.
19720071	20	n = 20	The present study contrasted the neural correlates of encoding item-context associations according to whether the contextual information was visual or auditory. Subjects (N=20) underwent fMRI scanning while studying a series of visually presented pictures, each of which co-occurred with either a visually or  an auditorily presented name. The task requirement was to judge whether the name  corresponded to the presented object. In a subsequent memory test subjects judged whether test pictures were studied or unstudied and, for items judged as studied, indicated the presentation modality of the associated name. Dissociable cortical  regions demonstrating increased activity for visual vs. auditory trials (and vice versa) were identified. A subset of these modality-selective regions also showed  modality-selective subsequent source memory effects, that is, enhanced responses  on trials associated with correct modality judgments relative to those for which  modality or item memory later failed. These findings constitute direct evidence for the proposal that successful encoding of a contextual feature is associated with enhanced activity in the cortical regions engaged during the on-line processing of that feature. In addition, successful encoding of visual objects within auditory contexts was associated with more extensive engagement of the hippocampus and adjacent medial temporal cortex than was the encoding of such objects within visual contexts. This raises the possibility that the encoding of  across-modality item-context associations places more demands on the hippocampus  than does the encoding of within-modality associations.
19745020	24	n = 24	Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is important to brain functions such as  plasticity and repair. A single nucleotide polymorphism for this growth factor, val(66)met, is common and associated with decreased activity-dependent BDNF release. The current study evaluated the effects of this polymorphism in relation to human brain motor system function, short-term plasticity, and learning. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning during right index finger movement (n = 24) identified activation in a broad sensorimotor network. However, subjects with the polymorphism showed smaller activation volume within several brain regions as compared with subjects without the polymorphism. Repeat fMRI after 25 min of right index finger training found that the 2 genotype groups modulated brain activation differently. In several brain regions, subjects with the polymorphism showed greater activation volume reduction, whereas subjects without the polymorphism showed greater activation volume expansion. On a driving-based motor learning task (independent cohort, n = 29), subjects with the polymorphism showed greater error during short-term learning and poorer retention over 4 days, relative to subjects without the polymorphism. The presence of this  BDNF polymorphism is associated with differences in brain motor system function,  altered short-term plasticity, and greater error in short-term motor learning. The broader implications of these findings are considered.
19745020	29	n = 29
19775870	19	n = 19	The etiologic factors underlying schizophrenia have been conceptualized as reflecting two largely genetic components - those unique to schizophrenia and those representing vulnerability to neurodevelopmental deviation in general. The  Developmental Instability (DI) approach suggests that the latter can be indexed by minor physical anomalies (MPAs), which assess early prenatal growth abnormalities, and fluctuating anatomic asymmetries (FA), which reflects later deviations. Individuals with schizophrenia (N=19) had elevated scores on both measures as compared to healthy controls (N=23). Further, MPAs and FA were very highly correlated in the sample of individuals with schizophrenia but not in controls. In order to identify neuroanatomic variation linked with the unique factor, we conducted gray matter Voxel Based Morphometry analyses of group membership, with and without treating a composite measure of DI (based on FA, and MPAs) as a covariate. When DI was treated as a covariate, many more gray matter regions were found to statistically differ as a function of diagnosis. These results support the DI approach and suggest that the unique etiologic factors associated with schizophrenia lead to widespread gray matter volume reductions.
19775870	23	n = 23
19777553	49	n = 49	OBJECTIVES: There is a lot of variability between the results of studies reporting the pattern of gray matter volume changes in schizophrenia. Methodological issues may play an important role in this heterogeneity. The aim of the present study was to replicate the better performance of multivariate "source-based morphometry" (SBM) over the mass-univariate approach. EXPERIMENTAL  DESIGN: Voxel-based morphometry of Jacobian-modulated gray matter volume images,  using voxel and cluster level inference, and SBM were performed in a group of first-episode schizophrenia patients (N = 49) and healthy controls (N = 127). RESULTS: Using SBM we were able to find a significant reduction of gray matter volume in fronto-temporo-cerebellar areas whereas no significant results were obtained using voxel-based morphometry. CONCLUSION: Multivariate analysis of gray matter volume seems to be a suitable method for characterization of the pattern of changes at the beginning of the illness in schizophrenia subjects.
19777553	127	n = 127
19782695	12	n = 12	Behavioral and functional neuroimaging studies indicate deficits in verbal working memory (WM) and frontoparietal dysfunction in individuals with dyslexia.  Additionally, structural brain abnormalities in dyslexics suggest a dysconnectivity of brain regions associated with phonological processing. However, little is known about the functional neuroanatomy underlying cognitive dysfunction in dyslexia. In this study, functional magnetic resonance imaging and multivariate analytic techniques were used to investigate patterns of functional  connectivity during a verbal WM task in individuals with dyslexia (n=12) and control subjects (n=13). Dyslexics were not significantly slower than controls; however, they were less accurate with increasing WM demand. Independent component analysis identified 18 independent components (ICs) among which two ICs were selected for further analyses. These ICs included functional networks which were  positively correlated with the delay period of the activation task in both healthy controls and dyslexics. Connectivity abnormalities in dyslexics were detected within both networks of interest: within a "phonological" left-lateralized prefrontal network, increased functional connectivity was found  in left prefrontal and inferior parietal regions. Within an "executive" bilateral frontoparietal network, dyslexics showed a decreased connectivity pattern comprising bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal regions, while increased connectivity was found in the left angular gyrus, the left hippocampal cortex and the right thalamus. The functional connectivity strength in the latter regions was associated with WM task accuracy and with the numbers of errors during a spelling test. These data suggest functional connectivity abnormalities in two spatiotemporally dissociable brain networks underlying WM dysfunction in individuals with dyslexia.
19782695	13	n = 13
19823984	19	n = 19	The experience of being liked is a key social event and fundamental to motivating human behavior, though little is known about its neural underpinnings. In this study, we examined the experience of being liked in a group of 15- to 24-year-old: a cohort for whom forming friendships has a great degree of salience, and for whom the explicit representation of relationships is familiar from their frequent use of social networking technologies. Study participants (n  = 19) were led to believe that other participants had formed an opinion on their  likability based on their appearance in a photograph, and during fMRI scanning viewed the photographs of people who had purportedly responded favorably to them  (alongside photographs of control participants). Results indicated that being liked activated primary reward- and self-related regions, including the nucleus accumbens, midbrain (in an area corresponding to the ventral tegmentum), ventromedial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex (including retrosplenial cortex), amygdala, and insula/opercular cortex. Participants showed greater activation of ventromedial prefrontal cortex and amygdala in response to  being liked by people that they regarded highly compared to those they regarded less so. Finally, being liked by the opposite compared to the same gender activated the right caudal orbitofrontal cortex and right anterior insula: areas  important for the representation of primary somatic rewards. This study demonstrates that neural response to being liked has features that are consistent with response to other rewarding events, but it has additional features that reflect its intrinsically interpersonal character.
19833154	32	n = 32	A painful experience is modified by processes like habituation/antinociception or sensitization. Altered habituation may be one characteristic of chronic pain syndromes. In the present study we sought to investigate the functional magnetic  resonance imaging (fMRI) blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) correlate of rapid habituation to pain using simultaneous single trial electrodermal activity (EDA)/fMRI measurements. A total of N=32 healthy subjects have been investigated. Subjects received painful laser stimulation of the left hand. The fMRI BOLD response was measured simultaneously with continuous EDA recordings. Single trial EDA responses to laser stimulation habituated over time with substantial subject-to-subject differences in the degree and speed of habituation. fMRI BOLD  habituation was assessed by contrasting the first half of the experiment against  the second half and was found in primary and secondary somatosensory cortices, the insula and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). We hypothesized that single trial EDA habituation would reflect BOLD habituation which was investigated separately in subjects with 'faster' (N=15) and 'slower' (N=14) EDA habituation.  Significant habituation of the BOLD signal was only found in subjects with 'faster' EDA habituation that was accompanied by a signal increase in the rostral ACC and the periaqueductal grey. Furthermore, subjects with faster EDA habituation provided lower pain ratings. Therefore the EDA habituation profile to painful stimulation may constitute a pain-related (endo)phenotype and may be an informative additional endpoint measure in fMR-imaging of pain, especially when people suffering from chronic pain states in which pain processing is often altered are studied.
19833154	15	n = 15
19833154	14	n = 14
19878727	28	n = 28	Prior functional imaging studies of moral processing have utilized 'explicit' moral tasks that involve moral deliberation (e.g., reading statements such as 'he shot the victim' and rating the moral appropriateness of the behavior) or 'implicit' moral tasks that involve moral intuition (e.g., reading similar statements and memorizing them for a test but not rating their moral appropriateness). Although the neural mechanisms underlying moral deliberation and moral intuition may differ, these have not been directly compared. Studies using explicit moral tasks have reported increased activity in several regions, most consistently the medial prefrontal cortex and temporo-parietal junction. In  the few studies that have utilized implicit moral tasks, medial prefrontal activity has been less consistent, suggesting the medial prefrontal cortex is more critical for moral deliberation than moral intuition. Thus, we hypothesized  that medial prefrontal activity would be increased during an explicit, but not an implicit, moral task. Participants (n=28) were scanned using fMRI while viewing 50 unpleasant pictures, half of which depicted moral violations. Half of the participants rated pictures on moral violation severity (explicit task) while the other half indicated whether pictures occurred indoors or outdoors (implicit task). As predicted, participants performing the explicit, but not the implicit,  task showed increased ventromedial prefrontal activity while viewing moral pictures. Both groups showed increased temporo-parietal junction activity while viewing moral pictures. These results suggest that the ventromedial prefrontal cortex may contribute more to moral deliberation than moral intuition, whereas the temporo-parietal junction may contribute more to moral intuition than moral deliberation.
19909817	73	n = 73	There is a growing interest in the parietal cortical role for episodic memory retrieval. Previous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies of recency judgments, judgments of the relative temporal order of two studied items, have highlighted the involvement of the lateral prefrontal and medial temporal regions. However, the parietal cortical contribution to recency judgments has rarely been highlighted. To examine the parietal involvement, in this study, we conducted a re-analysis to increase the statistical power using three data sets (N=73) from our previous fMRI studies of recency judgments. Recency judgments can be achieved by at least two mechanisms, relational and item-based ones. It has been revealed that the left hippocampus/parahippocampal region is related to relational recency judgments, and that the right anterior temporal region is related to item-based recency judgments. We examined whether the parietal cortex  is involved in these two types of recency judgments. Significant brain activity related to relational recency judgments was observed in the left ventral parietal region and, as reported previously, the left parahippocampal region. On the other hand, significant brain activity related to item-based recency judgments was observed in the left dorsal parietal region and, as reported previously, the right anterior temporal region. Furthermore, correlation analyses of resting-state BOLD signals detected significant correlations between the ventral  parietal region and the parahippocampal region, as well as between the dorsal parietal region and anterior temporal region. These results suggest that the two  temporo-parietal networks differentially contribute to relational and item-based  recency judgments.
19913621	28	n = 28	Human behaviour is generally guided by the anticipation of potential outcomes that are considered to be rewarding. Reward processing can thus be dissected into a phase of reward anticipation and a phase of reward consumption. A number of brain structures have been suggested to be involved in reward processing. However, it is unclear whether anticipation and consumption are mediated by the same or different neural networks. We examined the neural basis of these processes using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in an incentive delay task offering either money or social approval. In both conditions participants (N=28) were given a cue indicating potential reward. In order to receive reward a target button had to be pushed within a certain time window (adapted for individual reaction time). Cues triggering either monetary or social reward anticipation were presented sessionwise. Imaging was performed on a 1.5-Tesla Philips scanner in an event-related design. Anticipation of both reward types activated brain structures constituting the brain reward system including the ventral striatum. In contrast to the task independent activity in the anticipation phase, reward consumption evoked different patterns of activation for money and social approval, respectively. While social stimuli were mainly associated with amygdala activation, the thalamus was more strongly activated by  the presentation of monetary rewards. Our results identify dissociable neural networks for the anticipation and consumption of reward. The findings implicate that the neural mechanisms underlying reward consumption are more modality-specific than those for reward anticipation, and that they are mediated  by subjective reward value.
19929329	12	n = 12	Severe deprivation in the first few years of life is associated with multiple difficulties in cognition and behavior. However, the brain basis for these difficulties is poorly understood. Structural and functional neuroimaging studies have implicated limbic system structures as dysfunctional, and one functional imaging study in a heterogeneous group of maltreated individuals has confirmed the presence of abnormalities in the basal ganglia. Based on these studies and known dopaminergic abnormalities from studies in experimental animals using social isolation, we used a task of monetary reward anticipation to examine the functional integrity of brain regions previously shown to be implicated in reward processing. Our sample included a group of adolescents (n = 12) who had experienced global deprivation early in their lives in Romania prior to adoption  into UK families. In contrast to a nonadopted comparison group (n = 11), the adoptees did not recruit the striatum during reward anticipation despite comparable performance accuracy and latency. These results show, for the first time, an association between early institutional deprivation and brain reward systems in humans and highlight potential neural vulnerabilities resulting from such exposures.
19929329	11	n = 11
19959343	12	n = 12	Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) and Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) commonly co-occur and may be linked by a network of brain regions involved in emotion regulation, including the orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala/parahippocamal region and insula. We hypothesized structural differences in this emotion network more prominently in CAD+MDD versus CAD and healthy control (CTRL) groups that do not involve depression-related emotion circuitry. In contrast, we hypothesized structural similarities between CAD+MDD and MDD groups, both involving depression-related circuitry. We obtained structural magnetic resonance imaging scans from age-matched consenting subjects (CAD+MDD, n = 12; CAD, n = 12; MDD, n  = 19; CTRL, n = 17) and performed a region of interest analysis. We found decreased grey matter volumes in the bilateral orbitofrontal cortex, bilateral amygdala/parahippocampal gyrus and right insula in CAD+MDD versus CTRL subjects and decreased grey matter volumes in the bilateral amygdala/parahippocampal regions in CAD+MDD versus CAD subjects. We found grey matter reductions in the right orbitofrontal cortex of CAD+MDD versus MDD subjects, and reductions in right insula of CAD versus CRTL subjects. Our results support that the network of brain regions involved in emotion regulation may be relevant to the relationship  between CAD and MDD.
19959343	12	n = 12
19959343	19	n = 19
19959343	17	n = 17
19962860	22	n = 22	Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is associated with cognitive deficits and morphometric brain abnormalities in childhood and a markedly elevated risk of schizophrenia in adolescence/early adulthood. Determining the relationship between neurocognition and neuroimaging findings would yield crucial information about childhood neurodevelopment and provide a basis for the study of the trajectory that occurs on the pathway to psychosis. We compared morphometric  brain findings between non-psychotic children with 22q11DS (n = 22) and healthy controls (n = 16), and examined the association between neurocognitive functioning and morphometric brain findings. Volumetric regional gray matter differences between the 22q11DS and control subjects were measured, and correlations of the regional gray matter volumes and neurocognition were performed. Children with 22q11DS demonstrated reductions in gray matter in several brain regions, chiefly the frontal cortices, the cingulate gyrus and the  cerebellum. The volumetric reductions in these salient areas were associated with poor performance in sustained attention, executive function and verbal memory; however, the relation of brain volume with cognitive performance did not differ between the patient and control groups. Thus, children with 22q11DS demonstrate gray matter reductions in multiple brain regions that are thought to be relevant  to schizophrenia. The correlation of these volumetric reductions with poor neurocognition indicates that these brain regions may mediate higher neurocognitive functions implicated in schizophrenia.
19962860	16	n = 16
19969089	21	n = 21	Individuals carrying the short allele of a common polymorphism in the promoter region of the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) exhibit heightened amygdala responses to passive stimulation with aversive emotional material. In turn, the level of amygdala activation in response to emotion can be decreased by will, for example by using cognitive emotion regulation strategies. In the present study, 37 female subjects (s-carriers: n=21; l/l-homozygotes: n=16) performed an emotion regulation task during functional magnetic resonance imaging to determine whether cognitive emotion regulation can modulate the genetically determined amygdala hyperreactivity in 5-HTTLPR short allele carriers. Our results demonstrate that cognitive emotion regulation diminishes the difference in amygdala reactivity to  threat-related stimuli between 5-HTTLPR genotype groups. Furthermore, we also provide evidence that the effect of cognitive regulation is mediated through altered coupling between the amygdala and prefrontal regulatory regions. Our findings demonstrate that while the presence of the 5-HTTLPR short allele leads to heightened responses in the amygdala, cognitive regulation can modify genetically mediated effects upon brain function by volitionally altering prefrontal-amygdala connectivity.
19969089	16	n = 16
20004365	27	n = 27	BACKGROUND: Failure to self-regulate after an interpersonal conflict can result in persistent negative mood and maladaptive behaviors. Research indicates that lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) activity is related to emotion regulation in response to laboratory-based affective challenges, such as viewing emotional pictures. This suggests that compromised LPFC function may be a risk factor for mood and behavior problems after an interpersonal conflict. However, it remains unclear whether LPFC activity to a laboratory-based affective challenge predicts  self-regulation in real life. METHODS: We investigated whether LPFC activity to a laboratory-based affective challenge (negative facial expressions of a partner) predicts self-regulation after a real-life affective challenge (interpersonal conflict). During a functional magnetic resonance imaging scan, healthy, adult participants in committed relationships (n = 27) viewed positive, negative, and neutral facial expressions of their partners. In a three-week online daily diary, participants reported conflict occurrence, level of negative mood, rumination, and substance use. RESULTS: LPFC activity in response to the laboratory-based affective challenge predicted self-regulation after an interpersonal conflict in  daily life. When there was no interpersonal conflict, LPFC activity was not related to mood or behavior the next day. However, when an interpersonal conflict did occur, ventral LPFC (VLPFC) activity predicted mood and behavior the next day, such that lower VLPFC activity was related to higher levels of negative mood, rumination, and substance use. CONCLUSIONS: Low LPFC function may be a vulnerability and high LPFC function may be a protective factor for the development of mood and behavior problems after an interpersonal stressor.
20004724	28	n = 28	Previous studies using explicit semantic tasks, such as category or similarity judgments, have revealed considerable neuroanatomical overlap between processing  of the meaning of words and pictures. This result may have been influenced by the semantic executive control required by such tasks. We examined the degree of overlap while minimizing semantic executive demands. In a first fMRI experiment (n=28), we titrated word (35.3 ms, SD=9.6) and picture presentation duration (50.7 ms, SD=15.8) such that conscious stimulus identification became a stochastic process, with a 50% chance of success. Subjects had to indicate by key press whether or not they had been able to identify the stimulus. In a second fMRI experiment (n=19), the identification runs were followed by a surprise forced-choice recognition task and events were sorted on the basis of subsequent  memory retrieval success rather than a subjective consciousness report. For both  words and pictures, when stimulus processing exceeded the conscious identification threshold, the left occipitotemporal sulcus (OTS), intraparietal sulcus, inferior frontal junction, and middle third of the inferior frontal sulcus (IFS) were more active than when subjects had been unable to identify the  stimulus. For both words and pictures, activity in two of these regions, IFS and  OTS, predicted subsequent memory retrieval success. A Bayesian comparison revealed that the effective connectivity between IFS and the word- or picture-specific systems was mainly mediated via its connections with OTS. The amodal nature of left OTS and IFS involvement in word and picture processing extends to tasks with minimal semantic executive demands.
20004724	19	n = 19
20005043	61	n = 61	The majority of neuroimaging studies on pain focuses on the study of BOLD activations, and more rarely on deactivations. In this study, in a relatively large cohort of subjects (N=61), we assess (a) the extent of brain activation and deactivation during the application of two different heat pain levels (HIGH and LOW) and (b) the relations between these two directions of fMRI signal change. Furthermore, in a subset of our subjects (N=12), we assess (c) the functional connectivity of pain-activated or -deactivated regions during resting states. As  previously observed, we find that pain stimuli induce intensity dependent (HIGH pain>LOW pain) fMRI signal increases across the pain matrix. Simultaneously, the  noxious stimuli induce activity decreases in several brain regions, including some of the 'core structures' of the default network (DMN). In contrast to what we observe with the signal increases, the extent of deactivations is greater for  LOW than HIGH pain stimuli. The functional dissociation between activated and deactivated networks is further supported by correlational and functional connectivity analyses. Our results illustrate the absence of a linear relationship between pain activations and deactivations, and therefore suggest that these brain signal changes underlie different aspects of the pain experience.
20005043	12	n = 12
20005295	83	n = 83	Polymorphisms in the G72 (also named d-amino acid oxidase activator, DAOA) gene increase the vulnerability for schizophrenia and affective psychosis. Three recent genetic neuroimaging studies showed that variation in G72 influences the brain activity in the medial temporal lobe (MTL), supporting the hypothesis that  G72 might play a modulatory role on brain activity in MTL structures. In the present study we therefore investigated the effect of G72 on the neural correlates of long-term memory encoding and retrieval in a large sample of healthy subjects (n=83) using functional magnetic resonance imaging. A face encoding and a face retrieval memory task were chosen because on the one hand they specifically activate MTL structures and on the other hand they tap into memory processes that are compromised in patients with schizophrenia and affective disorder. Despite a strong a-priori hypothesis of genotype group activation differences in the MTL along with a large sample size we did neither find an effect of G72 genotype status on brain activity in the MTL nor in any other brain regions. The present data therefore do not support the view of a general modulatory role of G72 on MTL brain activity, at least not in the domain  of long-term memory encoding and retrieval. Our results highlight the importance  of replication studies in genetic neuroimaging.
20035018	16	n = 16	This study explored the role of culture in shaping music perception and memory. We tested the hypothesis that listeners demonstrate different patterns of activation associated with music processing-particularly right frontal cortex-when encoding and retrieving culturally familiar and unfamiliar stimuli, with the latter evoking broader activation consistent with more complex memory tasks. Subjects (n = 16) were right-handed adults born and raised in the USA (n = 8) or Turkey (n = 8) with minimal music training. Using fMRI procedures, we scanned subjects during two tasks: (i) listening to novel musical examples from their own culture and an unfamiliar culture and (ii) identifying which among a series of brief excerpts were taken from the longer examples. Both groups were more successful remembering music of their home culture. We found greater activation for culturally unfamiliar music listening in the left cerebellar region, right angular gyrus, posterior precuneus and right middle frontal area extending into the inferior frontal cortex. Subjects demonstrated greater activation in the cingulate gyrus and right lingual gyrus when engaged in recall  of culturally unfamiliar music. This study provides evidence for the influence of culture on music perception and memory performance at both a behavioral and neurological level.
20035018	8	n = 8
20035018	8	n = 8
20060911	84	n = 84	INTRODUCTION: Memory dysfunction is a prominent feature in schizophrenia. Impairments of declarative memory have been consistently linked to alterations especially within hippocampal-prefrontal regions. Due to the high heritability of schizophrenia, susceptibility genes and their modulatory impact on the neural correlates on memory are of major relevance. In the present study the influence of the COMT val(158)met status on the neural correlates of declarative memory was investigated in healthy subjects. METHODS: From an initial behavioural sample of  522 healthy individuals (Sheldrick et al., 2008), 84 subjects underwent fMRI scanning while performing a memory encoding and a retrieval task. The COMT val(158)met status was determined for the whole sample and correlated with cortical activation within the group of n=84 individuals. RESULTS: There were no  effects of COMT status on behavioural performance. For declarative memory processing the number of met alleles predicted circumscribed bilateral insula and anterior hippocampus activations during memory encoding as well as less deactivations within the bilateral posterior parahippocampal gyri during memory retrieval. DISCUSSION: Although declarative memory performance was unaffected, the neural correlates within hippocampal-prefrontal regions demonstrate a link between COMT val(158)met carrier status and brain areas associated with declarative memory processing. The study contributes to a better understanding of the role that susceptibility genes might play in the aetiology of schizophrenia.
20074786	7	n = 7	The nature and frequency of speech production errors in neurodegenerative disease have not previously been precisely quantified. In the present study, 16 patients  with a progressive form of non-fluent aphasia (PNFA) were asked to tell a story from a wordless children's picture book. Errors in production were classified as  either phonemic, involving language-based deformations that nevertheless result in possible sequences of English speech segments; or phonetic, involving a motor  planning deficit and resulting in non-English speech segments. The distribution of cortical atrophy as revealed by structural MRI scans was examined quantitatively in a subset of PNFA patients (N=7). The few errors made by healthy seniors were only phonemic in type. PNFA patients made more than four times as many errors as controls. This included both phonemic and phonetic errors, with a  preponderance of errors (82%) classified as phonemic. The majority of phonemic errors were substitutions that shared most distinctive features with the target phoneme. The systematic nature of these substitutions is not consistent with a motor planning deficit. Cortical atrophy was found in prefrontal regions bilaterally and peri-Sylvian regions of the left hemisphere. We conclude that the speech errors produced by PNFA patients are mainly errors at the phonemic level of language processing and are not caused by a motor planning impairment.
20080395	15	n = 15	Empathy deficits might play a role in social dysfunction in schizophrenia. However, few studies have investigated the neuroanatomical underpinnings of the subcomponents of empathy in schizophrenia. This study investigated the hemodynamic responses to three subcomponents of empathy in patients with schizophrenia (N=15) and healthy volunteers (N=18), performing an empathy cartoon task during functional magnetic resonance imaging. The experiment used a block design with four conditions: cognitive, emotional, and inhibitory empathy, and physical causality control. Data were analyzed by comparing the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal activation between the two groups. The cognitive empathy condition activated the right temporal pole to a lesser extent  in the patient group than in comparison subjects. In the emotional and inhibitory conditions, the patients showed greater activation in the left insula and in the  right middle/inferior frontal cortex, respectively. These findings add to our understanding of the impaired empathy in patients with schizophrenia by identifying a multi-level cortical dysfunction that underlies a deficit in each subcomponent of empathy and highlighting the importance of the fronto-temporal cortical network in ability to empathize.
20080395	18	n = 18
20092946	19	n = 19	Pain following injury to the nervous system is characterized by changes in sensory processing including pain. Although there are many studies describing pain evoked by peripheral stimulation, we have recently reported that pain can be evoked in subjects with complete spinal cord injury (SCI) during a motor imagery  task. In this study, we have used functional magnetic resonance imaging to explore brain sites underlying the expression of this phenomenon. In 9 out of 11  subjects with complete thoracic SCI and below-level neuropathic pain, imagined foot movements either evoked pain in a previously non-painful region or evoked a  significant increase in pain within the region of on-going pain (3.2+/-0.7-5.2+/-0.8). In both controls (n=19) and SCI subjects, movement imagery evoked signal increases in the supplementary motor area and cerebellar cortex. In SCI subjects, movement imagery also evoked increases in the left primary motor cortex (MI) and the right superior cerebellar cortex. In addition, in the SCI subjects, the magnitude of activation in the perigenual anterior cingulate cortex and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was significantly correlated with absolute increases in pain intensity. These regions expanded to include right and left anterior insula, supplementary motor area and right premotor cortex when percentage change in pain intensity was examined. This study demonstrates that in SCI subjects with neuropathic pain, a cognitive task is able to activate brain circuits involved in pain processing independently of peripheral inputs.
20105435	20	n = 20	Decision-making involves the ability to choose between competing actions that are associated with uncertain benefits and penalties. The Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), which mimics real-life decision-making, involves learning a reward-punishment rule over multiple trials. Patients with damage to ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) show deficits learning these rules, although this performance deficit is  not exclusively associated with VMPFC damage. In this study, we used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to study the roles of prefrontal cortex regions involved in rule learning and rule application in healthy adults using an adapted version of the Iowa Gambling Task. Participants (N=20) were asked to infer rules  over series of 16 trials in a two-deck card game. Rewards were given on each trial and punishment was unpredictable. For half of the series, those decks that  gave high rewards were also better decks in the long run. For the other half of the series, the decks that gave low rewards were better decks in the long run. Behaviorally, participants started to differentiate between advantageous and disadvantageous decks after approximately four/six trials, and learning occurred  faster for high-reward decks. Lateral PFC (lat-PFC) and Anterior Cingulate Coretex (ACC)/pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) were most active for early decisions, whereas medial orbital frontal cortex (med-OFC) was most active for decisions made later in the series. These results suggest that lat-PFC and ACC/pre-SMA are important for directing behavior towards long-term goals, whereas med-OFC represents reward values towards which behavior should be directed.
20123030	17	n = 17	A network of prefrontal and parietal regions has been implicated in executive control processes. However, the extent to which individual regions within this network are engaged in component control processes, such as inhibition of task-irrelevant stimulus attributes or shifting (switching) between attentional foci, remains controversial. Participants (N=17) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while performing a global-local task in which the global and local levels could facilitate or interfere with one another. Stimuli were presented in blocks in which participants either constantly shifted between the global and local levels, or consistently responded to one level only. Activations related to inhibition and shifting processes were observed in a large network of  bilateral prefrontal, parietal, and basal ganglia regions. Region of interest analyses were used to classify each region within this network as being common to inhibition and shifting, or preferential to one component process. Several regions were classified as being preferential to inhibition, including regions within the dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, the parietal lobes,  and the temporal-parietal junction. A limited set of regions in the parietal lobes and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex were classified as preferential to  shifting. There was a very large set of regions displaying activation common to both inhibition and shifting processes, including regions within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, and basal ganglia. Several of these common regions were also involved during facilitation, suggesting that they are responsive to the number of task-salient channels of information, rather than purely to demands on control processes.
20138739	21	n = 21	BACKGROUND: We previously reported reduced prefrontal cortex (PFC) grey matter volume among first episode, antipsychotic-naive schizophrenia subjects (SZ) exposed to HSV1 but not among healthy subjects (HS) (Prasad et al., 2007). Independently, rs1051788, an exonic polymorphism of the MHC Class I polypeptide-related sequence B (MICB) gene was associated with HSV1 seropositivity, as well as SZ risk. In this study, we examined whether PFC grey matter changes associated with HSV1 exposure varied against the background of MICB genotypes. METHODS: We examined Caucasian individuals from the sample we studied in our previous report (Prasad et al., 2007) (SZ, n=21 and HS, n=19). Whole brain voxelwise analysis of structural MRI scans was conducted using Statistical Parametric Mapping, ver 5 (SPM5). The impact of rs1051788 variation and HSV1 seropositivity on grey matter volumes was examined using regression models on the combined sample of cases and controls, and then within each diagnostic group. RESULTS: In the combined sample of cases and controls, we observed the main effects of HSV1 seropositivity and genotypes, and a significant joint effect of HSV1 seropositivity and genotype mainly in the PFC. The joint effect was more prominent among cases than among controls. DISCUSSION: Our observations suggest that rs1051788 and HSV1 seropositivity are associated individually and jointly with reduced PFC grey matter volume. The patterns of these associations differ by diagnostic status, and these factors explain only a  "small" portion of the variance in the grey matter volume reductions.
20138739	19	n = 19
20144945	26	n = 26	According to sociometer theory, self-esteem serves as a barometer of the extent to which individuals are socially included or excluded by others. We hypothesized that trait self-esteem would be related to social pain responsiveness, and we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to experimentally investigate this potential relationship. Participants (n = 26) performed a cyberball task, a computerized game of catch during which the participants were excluded from the game. Participants then rated the degree of social pain experienced during both inclusion in and exclusion from the game. Individuals with lower trait self-esteem reported increased social pain relative to individuals with higher trait self-esteem, and such individuals also demonstrated a greater degree of dorsal anterior cingulate cortex activation. A psychophysiological interaction analysis revealed a positive connectivity between the dorsal anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortices for the lower trait self-esteem group, and a corresponding negative connectivity for the higher trait self-esteem group. Heightened dorsal anterior cortex activity and a corresponding connection with the prefrontal cortex might be one possible explanation for the greater levels of social pain observed experienced by individuals with low trait self-esteem.
20152908	13	n = 13	Perceptual decision-making is a complicated, multi-stage process. Recently human  neuroimaging studies implicated a set of regions, extending from the medial frontal cortex to the inferior parietal lobule that are involved in various steps of perceptual judgments. However, relatively little is known about the dependence of perceptual decisions on the visual stimulus itself. In the current study, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to map neural activations while subjects performed a demanding 3D heading estimation task (heading slightly to the left or right of fixation). Subjects (n=13) were presented a constantly expanding optic-flow stimulus, composed of disparate red-blue spheres, viewed stereoscopically through red-blue glasses. We varied task difficulty either by adding incoherently moving spheres to the stimuli, hence reducing the strength of the motion signal and thereby increasing the amount of noise or by reducing the relevant differential information by decreasing the deviation of the average trajectory of the spheres from straight ahead. BOLD signals were compared during  "easy" and "hard" trials in both stimulation conditions to isolate the neural mechanisms underlying the decision process. We hypothesized that areas involved in perceptual decisions about motion should exhibit significantly different activation across both stimulus conditions. Our results indicate that during earlier, sensory-stimulation-related phases of decision-making the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate and inferior parietal cortex  showed more activation for the "easy" compared to the "hard" trials, while during later, response-related phases the bilateral precuneus and inferior parietal cortex, as well as the bilateral superior medial gyrus showed this pattern of activation. Our results suggest that a large, non-overlapping network of areas is involved in various steps of decisions regarding 3D motion.
20153608	15	n = 15	Schizophrenia and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) are associated  with similar deficits in working memory, attention, and inhibition. Both disorders also involve abnormalities of white matter integrity, possibly reflecting neural communication disruptions. There are likely some regional white matter abnormalities that underlie the common cognitive impairment, though also some regional abnormalities unique to each disorder. We used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to compare white matter integrity, as indicated by fractional anisotropy (FA), in adolescents with schizophrenia (n=15) or ADHD (n=14) and healthy controls (n=26). Schizophrenia patients had uniquely low FA, relative to  the other two groups, in bilateral cerebral peduncles, anterior and posterior corpus callosum, right anterior corona radiata, and right superior longitudinal fasciculus. ADHD patients had uniquely high FA in left inferior and right superior frontal regions. Both clinical groups had lower FA than controls in left posterior fornix. The two disorders generally demonstrated distinct patterns of abnormal connectivity suggesting that common cognitive and behavioral deficits derive from distinct sources, though the posterior fornix may be involved in both disorders. Schizophrenia was associated with abnormally low FA in widespread circuitry indicative of general connectivity disruptions, whereas ADHD was associated with abnormally high FA in frontal networks that may indicate impaired branching of fibers.
20153608	14	n = 14
20153608	26	n = 26
20167205	34	n = 34	Prevention of global gray matter (GM) volume changes in multiple sclerosis (MS) are an objective in clinical trials, but the effect of immunomodulatory medication on regional GM atrophy progression is unclear. MRIs from 86 patients with relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) followed up for 24 months were analyzed using  voxel-based morphometry. An analysis of covariance model (cluster threshold, corrected p<0.05) was used to compare GM volumes between baseline and follow-up while stratified by immunomodulatory medication (IM): Interferone INF-beta-1a (n=34), INF-beta-1b (n=16), glatiramer acetate (GA) (n=15), and no-immunomodulatory treatment (n=21). In the INF-beta-1a/1b group (n=50), significant GM volume reductions were observed during follow-up in fronto-temporal, cingulate and cerebellar cortical brain regions, without significant differences between the INF-beta-1a and INF-beta-1b patients. In the  GA group and in unmedicated patients, no significant regional GM volume reductions were observed. In contrast to GA, INF-beta-1a/1b treatment was associated with GM volume reductions in hippocampal/parahippocampal and anterior  cingulate cortex. This is the first longitudinal study investigating the effects  of IMs on GM in RRMS. Results suggest differences in the dynamics of regional GM  volume atrophy in differentially treated or untreated RRMS patients.
20167205	16	n = 16
20167205	15	n = 15
20167205	21	n = 21
20167205	50	n = 50
20188516	34	n = 34	Emotion regulation processes, such as reappraisal, are thought to operate through interactions between prefrontal emotion-control regions and subcortical emotion-generation regions such as the amygdala. Impairments in emotional processing and regulation have been reported in schizophrenia and at-risk populations. Psychometric measures may be used to detect vulnerability to schizophrenia in non-clinical samples, or psychosis proneness (PP). It has been shown that individuals with PP have a more than tenfold increased risk of developing a schizophrenia-spectrum disorder. In the present study, we used fMRI  to examine the neural dynamics underlying reappraisal in such a sample. 600 undergraduate students completed the Community Assessment of Psychic Experiences  Questionnaire (CAPE), positive subscale. Two groups were subsequently formed from the extremes of the distribution (total N=34). Blood-oxygenated-level-dependent activity elicited with a task involving 3 conditions was analyzed: viewing neutral pictures, viewing negative pictures, and reappraising negative pictures.  Subjects reported the strength of experienced negative affect after each trial. Functional connectivity between prefrontal control regions and amygdala was investigated. At the behavioral level, both groups reported successful diminishment of experienced negative emotion. However, high psychosis-prone subjects showed stronger activation than low subjects in a number of prefrontal regions during reappraisal, relative to attending to negative pictures. The amygdala response to negative stimuli was decreased through reappraisal only in the low group. Functional connectivity analysis revealed less prefrontal-amygdala coupling in high psychosis-prone subjects. Thus, reduced cognitive control of emotion at a neural level appeared to be associated with PP. These findings extend the hypothesis of emotion dysregulation in schizophrenia to PP, and suggest that emotion regulation difficulties may be at the core of a vulnerability to psychosis.
20351022	42	n = 42	Self-esteem is a facet of personality that influences perception of social standing and modulates the salience of social acceptance and rejection. As such,  self-esteem may bias neural responses to positive and negative social feedback across individuals. During functional magnetic resonance imaging scanning, participants (n = 42) engaged in a social evaluation task whereby they ostensibly received feedback from peers indicating they were liked or disliked. Results demonstrated that individuals with low self-esteem believed that they received less positive feedback from others and showed enhanced activity to positive versus negative social feedback in the ventral anterior cingulate cortex/medial prefrontal cortex (vACC/mPFC). By contrast, vACC/mPFC activity was insensitive to positive versus negative feedback in individuals with high self-esteem, and these individuals consistently overestimated the amount of positive feedback received from peers. Voxelwise analyses supported these findings; lower self-esteem predicted a linear increase in vACC/mPFC response to positive versus negative social feedback. Taken together, the present findings propose a functional role for the vACC/mPFC in representing the salience of social feedback and shaping perceptions of relative social standing.
20374289	37	n = 37	Inattention and impulsivity are the most prominent clinical features of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adulthood. Structural and functional neuroimaging studies of subjects with ADHD have demonstrated abnormalities in several brain areas, including fronto-striatal and fronto-cerebellar networks. Mostly, these studies were based on volumetric measurements and have been conducted in children. We investigated white matter (WM) integrity and correlation with measures of attention and impulsivity in adult patients with ADHD adopting diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). N = 37 (21 males) never-medicated adult patients with ADHD combined subtype and N = 34 (16 males) healthy controls  were investigated. ADHD diagnosis (DSM-IV) was assessed with clinical interviews  and rating scales, subjects also underwent a large neuropsychological test battery including tests of attention and impulsivity. DTI was acquired, and group differences of fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) as well as correlation analyses with measures of attentional performance and impulsivity were calculated using voxel-based analyses. In adult patients with ADHD, we found reduced FA as well as higher MD bilaterally in orbitomedial prefrontal WM and in  the right anterior cingulate bundle, while elevated FA was present bilaterally in temporal WM structures. Measures of attention were correlated with DTI parameters in the right superior longitudinal fasciculus, whereas measures of impulsivity were correlated with FA in right orbitofrontal fibre tracts. This is the first DTI study demonstrating disturbed structural connectivity of the frontal-striatal circuitry in adult patients with ADHD. Moreover, a direct correlation between WM  integrity and measures of attention and impulsivity is shown.
20374289	34	n = 34
20375250	12	n = 12	The goal of this study was to characterize the dynamics and functional connectivity of brain networks associated with fast (short-term) learning of handwriting using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Participants (n = 12) performed a graphomotor sequence learning task (naive subjects learning to draw simple, 3-stroke Chinese word characters), which focused the learning process on  the kinematic aspects of sequence learning instead of on the production of the line segments. Learning of the graphomotor sequence was demonstrated by a progressive improvement in movement smoothness as assessed by normalized jerk scores. Examination of the patterns of regional neural activity and functional connectivity during sequence learning demonstrated that cortical regions, which may support visuomotor mapping components of the task, were active prior to subcortical areas that may play a role in encoding and refining the novel sequences. Importantly, differences in the time course of recruitment of basal ganglia and cerebellar networks suggest distinct but integrated roles in the encoding and refining of the handwritten sequences. This implies multiple kinematic representations of graphomotor trajectories may be encoded at various spatiotemporal scales.
20395549	16	n = 16	The acquisition of reading skills is a major landmark process in a human's cognitive development. On the neural level, a new functional network develops during this time, as children typically learn to associate the well-known sounds  of their spoken language with unfamiliar characters in alphabetic languages and finally access the meaning of written words, allowing for later reading. A critical component of the mature reading network located in the left occipito-temporal cortex, termed the "visual word-form system" (VWFS), exhibits print-sensitive activation in readers. When and how the sensitivity of the VWFS to print comes about remains an open question. In this study, we demonstrate the  initiation of occipito-temporal cortex sensitivity to print using functional MRI  (fMRI) (n = 16) and event-related potentials (ERP) (n = 32) in a controlled, longitudinal training study. Print sensitivity of fast (<250 ms) processes in posterior occipito-temporal brain regions accompanied basic associative learning  of letter-speech sound correspondences in young (mean age 6.4 +/- 0.08 y) nonreading kindergarten children, as shown by concordant ERP and fMRI results. The occipito-temporal print sensitivity thus is established during the earliest phase of reading acquisition in childhood, suggesting that a crucial part of the  later reading network first adopts a role in mapping print and sound.
20395549	32	n = 32
20413448	7	n = 7	Benham's top is a rotating black-and-white pattern that fuses to form concentric  rings of different colors (Prevost-Fechner-Benham subjective colors [SCs]). The underlying mechanism has been explained as resulting from local retinal cell interactions, yet the cortical processing of this illusion is largely unknown. We used rapid event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate the neural mechanisms of this SC illusion. The SCs induced when Benham's top rotated  at 5 Hz were compared with perceptually matched physical color (PC) stimuli to reveal differences in both the neural substrates and their dynamic interactions by means of effective connectivity. Subjects (n = 7, all with normal vision) were required to judge whether or not they perceived color in each stimulus. The activation patterns for each condition were almost identical, but the effective connectivity from V4 to V2 and V2 to V1 was stronger during SC perception than when viewing perceptually matched PCs. All subjects perceived SC when the rotation speed of Benham's top was greater than or equal to 3 Hz, which was coupled with enhanced effective connectivity between V4 and V1. These results indicate that modulation from V4 to V2 to V1 plays a significant role in SC perception during the Benham's top illusion.
20416863	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: Parental alcoholism substantially raises risk for offspring alcoholism, an effect thought to be mediated by a dysregulation in impulse control. Adult alcoholics have alterations in the frontostriatal system involved  in regulating impulsive responses. However, it remains controversial whether these alterations reflect preexisting traits predisposing to problem alcohol use  or are secondary to alcohol involvement. METHODS: Sixty-one 16 to 22 year olds were tested using a go/no-go task during functional magnetic resonance imaging. Forty-one were family history positive (FH+), having at least one parent with a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder (AUD), and 20 were family history negative (FH-). Two FH+ subgroups were created to disentangle alcohol involvement from preexisting risk: the FH+ control group (n = 20) had low alcohol problems, differing from the FH- group only by family history. The FH+ problem group (n = 21) had high alcohol problems. RESULTS: The ventral caudate deactivated during successful inhibition in the FH- but not the FH+ groups, regardless of problem alcohol involvement. Regression analyses showed that ventral caudate deactivation was related to fewer externalizing problems as well as to family history. Orbital and left medial prefrontal regions were deactivated in both the FH- and FH+ control groups but not the FH+ problem group. Activation in these regions was associated with alcohol and other drug use. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest a preexisting abnormality in ventral striatal function in youth at risk for AUD, which may lead to inappropriate motivational responding, and suggest that with alcohol use, the prefrontal "control" mechanism loses efficiency, further dysregulating the frontostriatal motivational circuitry.
20416863	21	n = 21
20434467	12	n = 12	Cerebral patterns of activity elicited by dual-task performance throughout the learning of a complex bimanual coordination pattern were addressed. Subjects (N=12) were trained on the coordination pattern and scanned using fMRI at early (PRE) and late (POST) learning stages. During scanning, the coordination pattern  was performed either as a single task or in concurrence with a simultaneous visual search task (i.e. dual task). Kinematics data revealed a significant performance improvement as a result of learning. In PRE-scanning, the dual-task condition induced deterioration of motor performance, relative to the single-task condition. Activity in lateral frontal and parietal regions involved in both visual search and motor coordination tasks (i.e. 'overlapping' regions) was reduced when the tasks were performed simultaneously. In POST-scanning, kinematics performance was equivalent under single- and dual-task conditions, suggesting automaticity of the coordination pattern. Furthermore, overlap between regions involved in visual search and motor tasks was reduced, and dual-task performance was no longer associated with reduction of frontal and parietal activity. Our results suggest that behavioral interference between a complex motor coordination task and a simple simultaneous visual search task occurs when  both tasks recruit overlapping regions in the frontal and parietal cortices. This may provide a neural basis for dissipation of dual-task interference following extensive motor practice, which is a traditional behavioral marker of motor automaticity.
20445046	42	n = 42	Little is known about how the properties of our private mental world relate to the physical and functional properties of our brain. Studying synesthesia, where  a particular experience evokes a separate additional sensory experience, offers the unique opportunity to study phenomenological experiences as a stable trait in healthy subjects. A common form of synesthesia is grapheme-color synesthesia, where a particular letter or number evokes a particular color experience. We studied the neural basis of qualitative different properties of the synesthetic experience by using individual differences in grapheme-color synesthesia. Specifically, the synesthetic color can be experienced "in the mind" (associator  synesthetes) or "in the outside world" (projector synesthetes). Gray matter structure and functioning (imaged using voxel-based morphometry and functional magnetic resonance imaging, respectively) were examined in grapheme-color synesthetes (N = 42, 16 projectors and 26 associators) and nonsynesthetes. Results indicated partly shared mechanisms for all grapheme-color synesthetes, particularly in posterior superior parietal lobe, which is involved in the integration of sensory information. In addition, the nature of synesthetic experience was found to be mediated by distinct neural mechanisms. The outside-world experience is related to brain areas involved in perceiving and acting in the outside world (visual cortex, auditory cortex, motor cortex) as well as frontal brain areas. In contrast, the in-the-mind experience is related to the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus, known for their role in memory. Thus, the different subjective experiences are related to distinct neural mechanisms. Moreover, the properties of subjective experiences are in accordance  with functional properties of the mediating brain mechanisms.
20471751	9	n = 9	Due to maturation-related plasticity of the developing nociceptive system, neonatal nociceptive input, as induced by medical procedures in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), may cause long-term alterations in pain processing. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, this study investigated the cerebral pain response in school-aged children and adolescents (11-16 yr) with experience  in a NICU after preterm (<or=31 weeks gestational age, N=9) or fullterm birth (>or=37 weeks gestational age, N=9) as compared to fullterm control children without early hospitalization (N=9). NICU children had been recruited retrospectively among former patients of the Children's University Hospital Mannheim. All children had participated in our previous studies [46,49] entailing psychophysical measurements. In response to tonic (30s) heat stimuli of individually adjusted moderate pain intensity, which were of comparable temperature across groups, the preterm but not the fullterm NICU children exhibited significant activations in a number of brain regions (thalamus, anterior cingulate cortex, cerebellum, basal ganglia, and periaquaeductal gray) that were not significantly activated in controls. The preterms showed significantly higher activations than controls in primary somatosensory cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and insula. This exaggerated brain response was pain-specific and was not observed during non-painful warmth stimulation. Preterms' continuous pain ratings revealed a tendency for increased sensitization within and a lack of habituation across trials. In highly vulnerable children such as preterms, neonatal nociceptive input may, aside from other neurodevelopmental consequences, persistently increase the gain within pain pathways.
20471751	9	n = 9
20471751	9	n = 9
20497902	50	n = 50	BACKGROUND: Though a key symptom underlying many anxiety disorders is hypervigilant threat monitoring, its biological bases in humans remain poorly understood. Animal models suggest that anxious processes such as hypervigilant threat monitoring are distinct from cued fear-like responses and mediated by the  bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST). Here, we applied psychophysiological  and neuroimaging methodologies sensitive to sustained arousal-based responses to  test the role of the human BNST in mediating environmental threat monitoring, a potential experimental model for sustained anxiety symptoms. METHODS: Healthy participants (n = 50) with varying trait anxiety performed an environmental threat-monitoring task during functional magnetic resonance imaging where a stimulus line continuously fluctuated in height, providing information relevant to subsequent risk for electric shocks. Skin conductance was collected in a separate cohort (n = 47) to validate task-evoked modulation of physiological arousal. RESULTS: A forebrain region consistent with the BNST showed greater overall recruitment and exaggerated tracking of threat proximity in individuals with greater anxiety. The insular cortex tracked threat proximity across all participants, showed exaggerated threat proximity responding with greater anxiety, and showed enhanced recruitment when threat proximity was ostensibly controllable. CONCLUSIONS: Activity in the BNST and insula continuously monitored changes in environmental threat level and also subserved hypervigilant threat-monitoring processes in more highly trait anxious individuals. These findings bridge human and animal research informing the role of the BNST in anxious-related processes. In addition, these findings suggest that continuous functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigms offer promise in further elucidating the neural circuitries supporting sustained anticipatory features of  anxiety.
20497902	47	n = 47
20534459	64	n = 64	Recent studies have suggested that the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) contributes both to understanding the mental states of others and to introspecting about one's own mind. This finding has suggested that perceivers might use their own thoughts and feelings as a starting point for making inferences about others, consistent with "simulation" or "self-projection" views  of social cognition. However, perceivers cannot simply assume that others think and feel exactly as they do; social cognition also must include processes that adjust for perceived differences between self and other. Recent cognitive work has suggested that such correction occurs through a process of "anchoring-and-adjustment" by which perceivers serially tune their inferences from an initial starting point based on their own introspections. Here, we used functional MRI to test two predictions derived from this anchoring-and-adjustment view. Participants (n = 64) used a Likert scale to judge the preferences of another person and to indicate their own preferences on the same items, allowing  us to calculate the discrepancy between the participant's answers for self and other. Whole-brain parametric analyses identified a region in the MPFC in which activity was related linearly to this self-other discrepancy when inferring the mental states of others. These findings suggest both that the self serves as an important starting point from which to understand others and that perceivers customize such inferences by serially adjusting away from this anchor.
20570115	10	n = 10	Neural correlates of emotional dysregulation in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and persisting influence of Methylphenidate (MPH) still remain insufficiently understood. Decreased activation in the subgenual cingulate and the ventral striatum were found during the perception of positive and negative affective pictures in drug-naive males with ADHD during childhood (n=10). Males with ADHD during childhood treated with MPH (n=10) did not show any significant differences compared to healthy controls (n=10). Further prospective studies need to clarify direct and indirect mechanisms of MPH treatment that may contribute to emotional processing, which is dysfunctional in males without pharmacological treatment in childhood.
20570115	10	n = 10
20570115	10	n = 10
20578174	12	n = 12	Brain activation studies generally utilize blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) contrast, most commonly measured using the gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) technique. BOLD contrast arises from regional changes in cerebral blood flow (CBF), cerebral blood volume (CBV), and the local metabolic rate of oxygen consumption. An alternative to BOLD is the detection of activation through direct measurement of these parameters. A noninvasive approach to measure activation-related CBV changes is the vascular space occupancy (VASO) method, which exploits blood as an endogenous contrast agent by selectively nulling the magnetization of the water spins in the blood. Using a recently developed multislice variant of VASO that enables single-shot whole-brain coverage by virtue of a three-dimensional GRASE readout, we here present the first application of VASO to an fMRI study with a whole-brain cognitive task. Within acceptable measurement times ( approximately 12 minutes), brain activation during a Stroop color-word matching task could be detected reliably both on the group (N = 12) and single subject level, as evident from a qualitative comparison with separately acquired BOLD data and literature reports.
20592124	18	n = 18	The path from perception to action involves the transfer of information across various reference frames. Here we applied a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) repetition suppression paradigm to determine the reference frame(s) in which the cortical activity is coded at several phases of the sensorimotor transformation for a saccade, including sensory processing, saccade planning, and saccade execution. We distinguished between retinal (eye-centered) and nonretinal (e.g., head-centered) coding frames in three key regions: the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), frontal eye field (FEF), and supplementary eye field (SEF). Subjects (n = 18) made delayed saccades to one of five possible peripheral targets, separated at intervals of 9 degrees visual angle. Target locations were  chosen pseudorandomly, based on a 2 x 2 factorial design, with factors retinal and nonretinal coordinates and levels novel and repeated. In all three regions, analysis of the blood oxygenation level dependent dynamics revealed an attenuation of the fMRI signal in trials repeating the location of the target in  retinal coordinates. The amount of retinal suppression varied across the three phases of the trial, with the strongest suppression during saccade planning. The  paradigm revealed only weak traces of nonretinal coding in these regions. Further analyses showed an orderly representation of the retinal target location, as expressed by a contralateral bias of activation, in the IPS and FEF, but not in the SEF. These results provide evidence that the sensorimotor processing in these centers reflects saccade generation in eye-centered coordinates, irrespective of  their topographic organization.
20600979	12	n = 12	Neuroimaging studies on healthy subjects have reported the involvement of the bilateral anterior temporal lobes (ATL) in recognizing known people. While the role of the right ATL in the semantic processing of known people is accepted, it  is still matter of debate whether left ATL is implicated in the name retrieval or in the access to semantic information. In the present fMRI study, we modulated the level of specificity of the semantic categorization task of famous face stimuli in order to map the brain regions involved in the specific semantic processing controlling for automatic name access. Specifically, participants (n = 12, mean age = 23.0+/-1.7 years, F/M = 8/4) were asked to determine whether the stimulus photograph matched with the label of the profession category. Since the  same set of stimuli was used for both specific and general conditions, contrasting these two conditions controlled for the activation due to the automatic access to the name of famous persons. Results showed that: 1) the right ATL was activated by a semantic categorization task of famous face stimuli at both general and specific level; 2) while controlling for the activation due to the automatic name retrieval, the left ATL showed increased activation during the specific categorization task; 3) the specificity of the semantic processing increased strength of connections towards the left ATL from the right lateral fusiform gyrus, devoted to the visual processing of faces, and from the right ATL. These findings support the idea of a crucial role of the left anterior temporal lobe in the processing of person-specific semantic information.
20600990	7	n = 7	The relationship between the human brain response to acute stress and subjective, behavioural and physiological responses is poorly understood. We have examined the human cerebral response to the intense interoceptive stressor of hypoglycemia, controlling plasma glucose at either normal fasting concentrations  (5 mmol/l, n=7) or at hypoglycemia (2.7 mmol/l, n=10) for 1 h in healthy volunteers. Hypoglycemia was associated with symptomatic responses, counterregulatory neuroendocrine responses and a sequential pattern of brain regional engagement, mapped as changes in relative cerebral perfusion using [(15)O]-H(2)O water positron emission tomography. The early cerebral response comprised activation bilaterally in anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and thalamic  pulvinar, with deactivation in posterior parahippocampal gyrus. Later responses (>20 min) engaged bilateral anterior insula, ventral striatum and pituitary. Following resolution of hypoglycemia, the majority of responses returned to baseline, save persistent engagement of the ACC and sustained elevation of growth hormone and cortisol. Catecholamine responses correlated with increased perfusion in pulvinar and medial thalamus, ACC and pituitary, while growth hormone and cortisol responses showed no correlation with thalamic activation but did show additional correlation with the hypothalamus and ventral striatum bilaterally. These data demonstrate complex dynamic responses to the stressor of hypoglycemia  that would be expected to drive physiological and behavioural changes to remedy the state. Further, these data show that sustained stress and its aftermath engage distinct sets of brain regions, providing a neural substrate for adaptive  or 'allostasic' responses to stressors.
20600990	10	n = 10
20647004	112	n = 112	Structural sexual dimorphism and asymmetry in human cerebellum have been described in previous research, but results remain inconclusive or even conflicting. In this study, gender differences and hemispheric asymmetries in global and regional human cerebellum gray matter (GM) were estimated in an age-matched sample (n=112) of young Chinese adults. An optimized voxel-based morphometry (VBM) in spatial unbiased infratentorial template (SUIT) space together with an automated atlas-based volumetric approach were performed for mapping regional gray matter (GM) gender-related differences across the entire cerebellum. The two methods provided consistent findings on gender differences. The cerebellar GM volume was significantly larger in the anterior and middle posterior lobes of male group. In addition, a trend of greater GM volume in lateral posterior lobe of female group was observed. With the created symmetric cerebellar template, the asymmetric properties of cerebellar hemisphere were also assessed by VBM analysis, showing rightward asymmetry distributed in most cerebellar lobules and leftwards asymmetry distributed in the lobules around the  medial posterior lobe. Gender differences in males showed higher leftward asymmetry sparsely within a few lobules and lower rightward asymmetry mainly within lobule Crus II, as compared with females. The acquired detailed morphologic knowledge of normal human cerebellum could establish a baseline for comparison with pathologic changes in the cerebellum. Moreover, our results might help to address controversies in thestudy of sexual dimorphisms and asymmetric patterns in human cerebellum.
20669165	19	n = 19	Chemotherapy is associated with cognitive impairment in a subgroup of breast cancer survivors, but the neural circuitry underlying this side effect is largely unknown. Moreover, long-term impairment has not been studied well. In the present study, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and neuropsychological testing were performed in breast cancer survivors almost 10 years after high-dose adjuvant chemotherapy (chemo group, n = 19) and in breast cancer survivors for whom chemotherapy had not been indicated (control group, n = 15). BOLD activation and performance were measured during an executive function task involving planning abilities (Tower of London) and a paired associates task for assessment  of episodic memory. For the chemo group versus the control group, we found hyporesponsiveness of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in the Tower of London, and  of parahippocampal gyrus in the paired associates task. Also, the chemo group showed significantly impaired planning performance and borderline significantly impaired recognition memory as compared to findings in the control group. Whole-brain analyses demonstrated hyporesponsiveness of the chemo versus the control group in very similar regions of bilateral posterior parietal cortex during both the Tower of London and the paired associates task. Neuropsychological testing showed a relatively stable pattern of cognitive impairment in the chemo group over time. These results indicate that high-dose adjuvant chemotherapy is associated with long-term cognitive impairments. These impairments are underpinned by (a) task-specific hyporesponsiveness of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and parahippocampal gyrus, and (b) a generalized hyporesponsiveness of lateral posterior parietal cortex encompassing attentional  processing.
20669165	15	n = 15
20673801	15	n = 15	Theories of specific phobias consider classical conditioning as a central mechanism in the pathogenesis and maintenance of the disorder. Although the neuronal network underlying human fear conditioning is understood in considerable detail, no study to date has examined the neuronal correlates of fear conditioning directly in patients with specific phobias. Using functional magnet  resonance imaging (fMRI) we investigated conditioned responses using phobia-relevant and non-phobia-relevant unconditioned stimuli in patients with specific phobias (n=15) and healthy controls (n=14) by means of a differential picture-picture conditioning paradigm: three neutral geometric figures (conditioned stimuli) were followed by either pictures of spiders, highly aversive scenes or household items (unconditioned stimuli), respectively. Enhanced activations within the fear network (medial prefrontal cortex, anterior  cingulate cortex, amygdala, insula and thalamus) were observed in response to the phobia-related conditioned stimulus. Further, spider phobic subjects displayed higher amygdala activation in response to the phobia-related conditioned stimulus than to the non-phobia-related conditioned stimulus. Moreover, no differences between patients and healthy controls emerged regarding the non-phobia-related conditioned stimulus. The results imply that learned phobic fear is based on exaggerated responses in structures belonging to the fear network and emphasize the importance of the amygdala in the processing of phobic fear. Further, altered responding of the fear network in patients was only observed in response to the phobia-related conditioned stimulus but not to the non-phobia-related conditioned stimulus indicating no differences in general conditionability between patients with specific phobias and healthy controls.
20673801	14	n = 14
20673804	13	n = 13	Previous neuroimaging studies suggest that prefrontal cortex (PFC) modulation of  the amygdala and related limbic structures is an underlying neural substrate of effortful emotion regulation. Anxiety-prone individuals experience excessive negative emotions, signaling potential dysfunction of systems supporting down-regulation of negative emotions. We examined the hypothesis that anxious individuals require increased recruitment of lateral and medial PFC to decrease negative emotions. An emotion regulation task that involved viewing moderately negative images was presented during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants with elevated trait anxiety scores (n=13) and normal trait anxiety scores (n=13) were trained to reduce negative emotions using cognitive reappraisal. Blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) changes were contrasted for periods when participants were reducing emotions versus when they were maintaining emotions. Compared to healthy controls, anxious participants showed greater activation of brain regions implicated in effortful (lateral PFC) and automatic (subgenual anterior cingulate cortex) control of emotions during down-regulation of negative emotions. Left ventrolateral PFC activity was associated with greater self-reported reduction of distress in anxious participants, but not in healthy controls. These findings provide evidence of altered functioning of neural substrates of emotion regulation in anxiety-prone individuals. Anxious participants required greater engagement of lateral and medial PFC in order to successfully reduce negative emotions.
20673804	13	n = 13
20674279	16	n = 16	Deficits in temporal judgment in schizophrenia have been observed in behavioral and electrophysiological studies for years. The functional neuroanatomy of temporal judgment in schizophrenia is, however, poorly understood. Recent neurophysiological research suggests that timing deficits in this population may  not be widespread across all timing tasks, but specifically associated with high  levels of difficulty. We evaluated differences between individuals with schizophrenia (N=16) and healthy subjects (N=18) during a temporal discrimination task at two levels of difficulty. Subjects were studied with functional magnetic  resonance imaging (fMRI) at 3T while discriminating tone durations. Behaviorally, the schizophrenia group performed worse than the control group at both levels of  difficulty. Similarly, group differences in patterns of brain activation were observed across both difficulty conditions. In the easy condition, individuals with schizophrenia showed less activation in the supplementary motor area and insula/opercula, regions known to be involved in temporal processing. These group differences increased in the difficult condition. In addition, the striatum was less active in individuals with schizophrenia in the difficult condition. Comparing the difficult to easy conditions revealed robust differences in the bilateral striatum and the insula/opercula, suggesting that the striatum plays a  key role in temporal processing deficits in schizophrenia, especially under difficult conditions. These observations suggest that temporal judgment deficits  reflect widespread neuroanatomical network involvement in schizophrenia, some of  which are not directly related to task difficulty. These findings shed light on disparate findings in the timing literature regarding the role of task difficulty in temporal judgment deficits in schizophrenia.
20674279	18	n = 18
20679216	31	n = 31	Although stress-induced increases in inflammation have been implicated in several major disorders, including cardiovascular disease and depression, the neurocognitive pathways that underlie inflammatory responses to stress remain largely unknown. To examine these processes, we recruited 124 healthy young adult participants to complete a laboratory-based social stressor while markers of inflammatory activity were obtained from oral fluids. A subset of participants (n = 31) later completed an fMRI session in which their neural responses to social rejection were assessed. As predicted, exposure to the laboratory-based social stressor was associated with significant increases in two markers of inflammatory activity, namely a soluble receptor for tumor necrosis factor-alpha (sTNFalphaRII) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). In the neuroimaging subsample, greater increases in sTNFalphaRII (but not IL-6) were associated with greater activity in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula, brain regions that have previously been associated with processing rejection-related distress and negative affect. These data thus elucidate a neurocognitive pathway that may be involved in potentiated inflammatory responses to acute social stress. As such, they have implications for understanding how social stressors may promote susceptibility to diseases with an inflammatory component.
20685091	15	n = 15	It is poorly understood how stressors modulate neurobiological mechanisms that may contribute to the heterogeneity of major depressive disorder (MDD). Unmedicated patients diagnosed with MDD (n=15) and individually matched healthy controls (n=15) completed stress questionnaires and were studied with functional  magnetic resonance imaging while viewing emotional words. Significant effects of  recent negative life stressors, but not early life stress/trauma, were observed on regional blood oxygen level dependent activity during presentation of negative words in patients with MDD. No significant effects of stress on brain activation  to negative words were found in controls. In MDD patients, positive correlations  were found bilaterally in orbitofrontal areas 11 l/47/12m, which are involved in  representing negatively valenced stimuli. Negative correlations were also found in the right ventrolateral prefrontal area 45, subgenual cingulate area 25, and nucleus accumbens, all of which are implicated in the pathophysiology of MDD. Negative memory bias was additionally positively associated with recent negative  life stress and negatively associated with subgenual cingulate activation, suggesting a mechanism by which stress may contribute to these abnormalities. The severity of recent negative life stressors is an important modifier of neurobiological and cognitive function in MDD and may help explain heterogeneity  in the disorder.
20685091	15	n = 15
20691792	17	n = 17	Evidence suggests that physical activity (PA) is associated with the maintenance  of cognitive function across the lifespan. In contrast, the apolipoproteinE-epsilon4 (APOE-epsilon4) allele, a genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), is associated with impaired cognitive function. The objective of this study was to examine the interactive effects of PA and APOE-epsilon4 on brain activation during memory processing in older (ages 65-85)  cognitively intact adults. A cross-sectional design was used with four groups (n=17 each): (1) Low Risk/Low PA; (2) Low Risk/High PA; (3) High Risk/Low PA; and (4) High Risk/High PA. PA level was based on self-reported frequency and intensity. AD risk was based on presence or absence of an APOE-epsilon4 allele. Brain activation was measured using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while participants performed a famous name discrimination task. Brain activation subserving semantic memory processing occurred in 15 functional  regions of interest. High PA and High Risk were associated with significantly greater semantic memory activation (famous>unfamiliar) in 6 and 3 of the 15 regions, respectively. Significant interactions of PA and Risk were evident in 9  of 15 brain regions, with the High PA/High Risk group demonstrating greater semantic memory activation than the remaining three groups. These findings suggest that PA selectively increases memory-related brain activation in cognitively intact but genetically at-risk elders. Longitudinal studies are required to determine whether increased semantic memory processing in physically  active at-risk individuals is protective against future cognitive decline.
20692648	84	n = 84	BACKGROUND: Childhood emotional maltreatment (CEM) has been associated with a profound and enduring negative impact on behavioral and emotional functioning. Animal models have shown that adverse rearing conditions, such as maternal separation, can induce a cascade of long-term structural alterations in the brain, particularly in the hippocampus, amygdala, and prefrontal cortex. However, in humans, the neurobiological correlates of CEM are unknown. METHODS: Using high-resolution T1-weighted 3T magnetic resonance imaging, anatomical scans and a whole-brain optimized voxel-based morphometry approach, we examined whether healthy control subjects and unmedicated patients with depression and/or anxiety  disorders reporting CEM before age 16 (n = 84; age: mean = 38.7) displayed structural brain changes compared with control subjects and patients who reported no childhood abuse (n = 97; age: mean = 36.6). RESULTS: We found that self-reported CEM is associated with a significant reduction in predominantly left dorsal medial prefrontal cortex volume, even in the absence of physical or sexual abuse during childhood. In addition, reduced medial prefrontal cortex in individuals reporting CEM is present in males and females, independent of concomitant psychopathology. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we show that CEM is associated with profound reductions of medial prefrontal cortex volume, suggesting that sustained inhibition of growth or structural damage can occur after exposure to CEM. Given the important role of the medial prefrontal cortex in the regulation of emotional behavior, our finding might provide an important link in understanding the increased emotional sensitivity in individuals reporting CEM.
20692648	97	n = 97
20708907	58	n = 58	Multiple strands of evidence suggest a role for Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. It is not yet clear, however, how BDNF may contribute to altered brain function seen in the disorder, or in those at high genetic risk. The current study examines functional imaging correlates of the BDNF val66met polymorphism in a population at high genetic risk of schizophrenia. Subjects at high genetic risk for the disorder (n=58) provided both BDNF genotyping and fMRI data while performing a verbal memory task. During  encoding, participants were presented with a word and asked to make a 'living'/'non-living' classification. During retrieval, individuals were requested to make an 'old'/'new' word classification. For encoding, we report decreased activation of the inferior occipital cortex and a trend in the cingulate cortex in Val homozygote individuals relative to Met carriers. For retrieval, we report decreases in activation in the prefrontal, cingulate cortex  and bilateral posterior parietal regions in Val homozygote individuals versus Met carriers. These findings add to previous evidence suggesting that genetic variation in the BDNF gene modulates prefrontal and limbic functioning and suggests that it may contribute to differences in brain function seen in those at high risk of the disorder.
20719303	39	n = 39	BACKGROUND: Although inflammatory activity is known to play a role in depression, no work has examined whether experimentally induced systemic inflammation alters  neural activity that is associated with anhedonia, a key diagnostic symptom of depression. To investigate this, we examined the effect of an experimental inflammatory challenge on the neural correlates of anhedonia-namely, reduced ventral striatum (VS) activity to reward cues. We also examined whether this altered neural activity related to inflammatory-induced increases in depressed mood. METHODS: Participants (n = 39) were randomly assigned to receive either placebo or low-dose endotoxin, which increases proinflammatory cytokine levels in a safe manner. Cytokine levels were repeatedly assessed through hourly blood draws; self-reported and observer-rated depressed mood were assessed regularly as well. Two hours after drug administration, neural activity was recorded as participants completed a task in which they anticipated monetary rewards. RESULTS: Results demonstrated that subjects exposed to endotoxin, compared with placebo, showed greater increases in self-reported and observer-rated depressed mood over time, as well as significant reductions in VS activity to monetary reward cues. Moreover, the relationship between exposure to inflammatory challenge and increases in observer-rated depressed mood was mediated by between-group differences in VS activity to anticipated reward. CONCLUSIONS: The  data reported here show, for the first time, that inflammation alters reward-related neural responding in humans and that these reward-related neural responses mediate the effects of inflammation on depressed mood. As such, these findings have implications for understanding risk of depression in persons with underlying inflammation.
20724032	17	n = 17	Severe white matter hyperintensities (WMH) represent cerebral small vessel disease and predict functional decline in the elderly. We used fMRI to test if severe WMH impact on functional brain network organization even before clinical dysfunction. Thirty healthy right-handed/footed subjects (mean age, 67.8 +/- 7.5  years) underwent clinical testing, structural MRI and fMRI at 3.0T involving repetitive right ankle and finger movements. Data were compared between individuals with absent or punctuate (n = 17) and early confluent or confluent (n = 13) WMH. Both groups did not differ in mobility or cognition data. On fMRI, subjects with severe WMH demonstrated excess activation in the pre-supplementary  motor area (SMA), frontal, and occipital regions. Activation differences were noted with ankle movements only. Pre-SMA activation correlated with frontal WMH load for ankle but not finger movements. With simple ankle movements and no behavioral deficits, elderly subjects with severe WMH demonstrated pre-SMA activation, usually noted with complex tasks, as a function of frontal WMH load.  This suggests compensatory activation related to disturbance of frontosubcortical circuits.
20724032	13	n = 13
20728873	23	n = 23	BACKGROUND: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a major public health concern. It has been suggested that the brain's default network may provide a crucial avenue for understanding the neurobiology of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Evaluations of the default network have increased over recent years with the applied technique of resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fcMRI). These investigations have established that spontaneous activity in this network is highly correlated at rest in young adult populations. This coherence seems to be reduced in adults with ADHD. This is an intriguing finding, as coherence in spontaneous activity within the default network strengthens with age. Thus, the pathophysiology of ADHD might include delayed or disrupted maturation of the default network. If so, it is important to determine whether an altered developmental picture can be detected using rs-fcMRI in children with ADHD. METHODS: This study used the typical developmental context provided previously by Fair et al. (2008) to examine coherence of brain activity within the default network using rs-fcMRI in  children with (n = 23) and without attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (n =  23). RESULTS: We found that functional connections previously shown as developmentally dynamic in the default network were atypical in children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder-consistent with perturbation or failure  of the maturational processes. CONCLUSIONS: These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that atypical consolidation of this network over development plays a role in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
20728873	23	n = 23
20739018	15	n = 15	BACKGROUND: The recent upsurge in interest about pediatric bipolar disorder (BD)  has spurred the need for greater understanding of its neurobiology. Structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging studies have implicated fronto-temporal dysfunction in pediatric BD. However, recent data suggest that task-dependent neural changes account for a small fraction of the brain's energy consumption. We now report the first use of task-independent spontaneous resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) to study the neural underpinnings of pediatric BD. METHODS: We acquired task-independent RSFC blood oxygen level-dependent functional magnetic resonance imaging scans while participants were at rest and also a high-resolution anatomical image (both at three Tesla) in BD and control youths (n = 15 of each). We focused, on the basis of prior research, on the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), amygdala, and accumbens. Image processing and group-level analyses followed that of prior work. RESULTS: Our primary analysis showed that pediatric BD participants had significantly greater negative RSFC between the left DLPFC and the right superior temporal gyrus versus control  subjects. Secondary analyses using partial correlation showed that BD and control youths had opposite phase relationships between spontaneous RSFC fluctuations in  the left DLPFC and right superior temporal gyrus. CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate  that pediatric BD is characterized by altered task-independent functional connectivity in a fronto-temporal circuit that is also implicated in working memory and learning. Further study is warranted to determine the effects of age,  gender, development, and treatment on this circuit in pediatric BD.
20807052	50	n = 50	Numerous studies have demonstrated that consuming high-calorie food leads to subsequent overeating by chronic dieters. The present study investigates the neural correlates of such self-regulatory failures using fMRI. Chronic dieters (n = 50) and non-dieters (n = 50) consumed either a 15-oz glass of cold water or a 15-oz milkshake and were subsequently imaged while viewing pictures of animals, environmental scenes, people, and appetizing food items. Results revealed a functional dissociation in nucleus accumbens and amygdala activity that paralleled well-established behavioral patterns of eating observed in dieters and non-dieters. Whereas non-dieters showed the greatest nucleus accumbens activity in response to food items after water consumption, dieters showed the greatest activity after consuming the milkshake. Activity in the left amygdala demonstrated the reverse interaction. Considered together with previously reported behavioral findings, the present results offer a suggested neural substrate for diet failure.
20807052	50	n = 50
20817487	122	n = 122	The present study aimed to investigate the presence of corpus callosum (CC) volume deficits in a population-based recent-onset psychosis (ROP) sample, and whether CC volume relates to interhemispheric communication deficits. For this purpose, we used voxel-based morphometry comparisons of magnetic resonance imaging data between ROP (n =122) and healthy control (n = 94) subjects. Subgroups (38 ROP and 39 controls) were investigated for correlations between CC  volumes and performance on the Crossed Finger Localization Test (CFLT). Significant CC volume reductions in ROP subjects versus controls emerged after excluding substance misuse and non-right-handedness. CC reductions retained significance in the schizophrenia subgroup but not in affective psychoses subjects. There were significant positive correlations between CC volumes and CFLT scores in ROP subjects, specifically in subtasks involving interhemispheric  communication. From these results, we can conclude that CC volume reductions are  present in association with ROP. The relationship between such deficits and CFLT  performance suggests that interhemispheric communication impairments are directly linked to CC abnormalities in ROP.
20817487	94	n = 94
20823085	38	n = 38	Neuroimaging studies have indicated abnormalities in cortico-striatal-thalamo-cortical circuits in patients with obsessive-compulsive  disorder compared with controls. However, there are inconsistencies between studies regarding the exact set of brain structures involved and the direction of anatomical and functional changes. These inconsistencies may reflect the differential impact of environmental and genetic risk factors for obsessive-compulsive disorder on different parts of the brain. To distinguish between functional brain changes underlying environmentally and genetically mediated obsessive-compulsive disorder, we compared task performance and brain activation during a Tower of London planning paradigm in monozygotic twins discordant (n=38) or concordant (n=100) for obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Twins  who score high on obsessive-compulsive symptoms can be considered at high risk for obsessive-compulsive disorder. We found that subjects at high risk for obsessive-compulsive disorder did not differ from the low-risk subjects behaviourally, but we obtained evidence that the high-risk subjects differed from the low-risk subjects in the patterns of brain activation accompanying task execution. These regions can be separated into those that were affected by mainly environmental risk (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and lingual cortex), genetic risk (frontopolar cortex, inferior frontal cortex, globus pallidus and caudate nucleus) and regions affected by both environmental and genetic risk factors (cingulate cortex, premotor cortex and parts of the parietal cortex). Our results suggest that neurobiological changes related to obsessive-compulsive symptoms induced by environmental factors involve primarily the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, whereas neurobiological changes induced by genetic factors involve orbitofrontal-basal ganglia structures. Regions showing similar changes in high-risk twins from discordant and concordant pairs may be part of compensatory  networks that keep planning performance intact, in spite of cortico-striatal-thalamo-cortical deficits.
20823085	100	n = 100
20832483	28	n = 28	The neural basis of memory subprocesses, encoding and retrieval, have been extensively examined in functional neuroimaging studies. However, the cortical substrates of taste memory, which form an important part of our episodic memory,  have rarely been explored in humans. Previously, we have used functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) and found activation of the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) related to taste encoding. The method used in the current study allowed brain monitoring while participants tasted liquid taste-stimuli in upright positions. Here, using the same system, we examined the LPFC activity of  28 healthy volunteers during both the encoding and the retrieval of taste memory. The contrast between the retrieval and eyes-closed-resting conditions revealed activation in the bilateral LPFC. This activation was significantly larger than that for encoding in the bilateral frontopolar and right dorso-LPFC regions, particularly in the right hemisphere (N=28, P<0.05, FDR corrected), exhibiting right hemispheric dominance. Our findings are in line with the hemispheric encoding/retrieval asymmetry (HERA) model, which proposes a process-specific prefrontal contribution to memory function.
20841321	26	n = 26	This study investigates the morphometry of Heschl's gyrus and its included primary auditory cortex (PAC) in hearing impaired (HI) and normal hearing (NH) infants. Fourty-two infants, age 8-19 months, with NH (n = 26) or hearing impairment (n = 16) were studied using high-resolution 3D magnetic resonance imaging. Gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM) volumes were obtained using software for automatic brain imaging segmentation to estimate the volume of each  tissue within manually defined regions for the anterior portion of Heschl's gyrus (aHG) in each individual subject, transformed to an infant brain template space.  Interactions among group (HI, NH), tissue type (GM, WM), and hemisphere (left, right) were examined using analysis of variance. Whole-brain voxel-based morphometry was utilized to explore volume differences between groups across the  entire brain. The HI group showed increased GM and decreased WM in aHG compared with the NH group; likely effects of auditory deprivation. The HI group did not exhibit their typical L > R asymmetry pattern that the NH group showed. Increased GM in aHG in HI infants may represent abnormal cortical development in PAC as seen in animal models of sensory deprivation. Lower WM volume is consistent with  studies with deaf adults.
20841321	16	n = 16
20862456	30	n = 30	RATIONALE: Beyond the amelioration of deprivation-induced impairments, and in contrast to effects on attentional processes, the cognitive-enhancing properties  of nicotine on working memory (WM) operations remain unclear. OBJECTIVES: In an effort to elucidate potential enhancing effects, we explored the impact of transdermal nicotine on neural functioning in minimally deprived smokers and, in  addition, assessed differences between smokers and non-smokers using a mixed block/event-related fMRI design that attempted to isolate specific central executive operations (attentional switch events) within general WM function (task blocks). METHODS: In task blocks, participants performed a continuous counting paradigm that required the simultaneous maintenance of, and frequent switching of attentional focus between, two running tallies in WM on some trials. Cigarette smokers (n = 30) were scanned twice, once each with a nicotine and placebo patch, while non-smokers (n = 27) were scanned twice with no patch. RESULTS: Across both groups, task blocks were associated with bilateral activation, notably in medial  and lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), anterior insula, and parietal regions, whereas individual attentional switch trials were associated with activation in a similar, but predominantly left-lateralized network. Within the smoker group, although nicotine increased heart rate, altered performance and mood, and reduced tobacco cravings, no acute drug (state-like) effect on brain activity was detected for either the task or switch effects. However, relative to non-smokers, smokers showed greater tonic activation in medial superior frontal cortex, right  anterior insula, and bilateral anterior PFC throughout task blocks (trait-like effect). CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest smokers require recruitment of additional WM and supervisory control operations during task performance.
20862456	27	n = 27
20884359	12	n = 12	Regions of the cortical autonomic network (CAN) are activated during muscle contraction. However, it is not known to what extent CAN activation patterns reflect muscle sensory inputs, top-down signals from the motor cortex, and/or motor drive to cardiovascular structures. The present study explored the functional representation of somatosensory afferent input within the CAN with an  a priori interest in the insula and ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC) (n=12). Heart rate (HR) and functional MRI data were acquired during 1) 30s periods of electrical stimulation of the wrist flexors at sub-motor (SUB; Type I,II afferents) and 2) motor thresholds (MOT; Type I,II,III afferents), 3) volitional wrist flexion at 5% maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) to match the MOT tension (VOL5%), and 4) volitional handgrip at 35% MVC to elicit tachycardia  (VOL35%). Compared with rest, HR did not change during SUB, MOT, or VOL5% but increased during VOL35% (p<0.001). High frequency HR variability was 29.42+/-18.87 ms(2) (mean+/-S.D.) at rest and 39.85+/-27.60 ms(2) during SUB (p=0.06). High frequency HR variability was decreased during VOL35% compared to rest (p</=0.005). SUB increased activity in the bilateral posterior insula, vMPFC, subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), mid-cingulate cortex (MCC), and posterior cingulate cortex. MOT increased activity in the left posterior insula and MCC. During VOL5%, activity increased in the right anterior-mid insula. VOL35% was associated with activity in the bilateral insula as well as vMPFC and  subgenual ACC deactivation. These data suggest that the left posterior insula processes sensory input from muscle during passive conditions and specifically that Type I and/or II muscle afferent stimulation during SUB impacts the vMPFC and/or subgenual ACC, regions believed to be involved in brain default mode and parasympathetic activity.
20884362	20	n = 20	Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies have reported reduced activation in parietotemporal and occipitotemporal areas in adults and children with developmental dyslexia compared to controls during reading and reading related tasks. These patterns of regionally reduced activation have been linked to behavioral impairments of reading-related processes (e.g., phonological skills and rapid automatized naming). The observed functional and behavioral differences in individuals with developmental dyslexia have been complemented by reports of reduced gray matter in left parietotemporal, occipitotemporal areas, fusiform and lingual gyrus and the cerebellum. An important question for education is whether  these neural differences are present before reading is taught. Developmental dyslexia can only be diagnosed after formal reading education starts. However, here we investigate whether the previously detected gray matter alterations in adults and children with developmental dyslexia can already be observed in a small group of pre-reading children with a family-history of developmental dyslexia compared to age and IQ-matched children without a family-history (N = 20/mean age: 5:9 years; age range 5:1-6:5 years). Voxel-based morphometry revealed significantly reduced gray matter volume indices for pre-reading children with, compared to children without, a family-history of developmental dyslexia in left occipitotemporal, bilateral parietotemporal regions, left fusiform gyrus and right lingual gyrus. Gray matter volume indices in left hemispheric occipitotemporal and parietotemporal regions of interest also correlated positively with rapid automatized naming. No differences between the two groups were observed in frontal and cerebellar regions. This discovery in a small group of children suggests that previously described functional and structural alterations in developmental dyslexia may not be due to experience-dependent brain changes but may be present at birth or develop in early childhood prior to reading onset. Further studies using larger sample sizes and longitudinal analyses are needed in order to determine whether the identified structural alterations may be utilized as structural markers for the early identification of children at risk, which may prevent the negative clinical, social and psychological outcome of developmental dyslexia.
20888872	6	n = 6	Previous functional neuroimaging studies found that the amygdala and other limbic regions may play a substantial role in social anxiety disorder (SAD). However, more widely distributed large-scale brain systems may be involved in cognitive processing in SAD patients when confronted with social situations. We employed functional MRI (fMRI) to investigate local brain activation of patients with SAD  (n=6) and healthy controls (HC, n=9) during cognitive work. During fMRI scanning, subjects performed a social situation task using a block design paradigm in which the task and control trials were performed by turn. The patients with SAD showed  higher anxiety levels during scanning in all social situations. The HC group showed greater common activation in the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), cuneus, occipital gyrus, and cerebellum. Although the patients with SAD showed activation patterns similar to that of the HC group, they showed comparatively significant decreased activation in the left cerebellum, left precuneus, and bilateral PCC. The present study demonstrates that SAD may involve dysfunction of a broad neuronal network including the limbic system, parieto-posterior cortex and cerebellum. The findings contribute to previous findings that revealed abnormal activities of emotion-related regions including the amygdala and insular cortex during facial perception in SAD.
20888872	9	n = 9
20932921	20	n = 20	Substance-dependent patients automatically and involuntarily allocate their attention to drug cues in the environment, a process referred to as attentional bias. Attentional bias is increased during periods of subjective craving and predictive of treatment outcome and relapse in substance dependence. Despite recent theoretical and clinical advances with regard to attentional bias, the underlying neurobiological mechanisms are largely unknown. The objective of the current study was to investigate the neural substrate of attentional bias and associated subjective craving in smokers. A group of smokers (n=20) and a group of age- and gender-matched nonsmoking controls (n=22) were recruited from the general population and participated in a single session of fMRI scanning while attentional processes were manipulated. Main outcome measures were blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI activation during an attentional bias paradigm and self-reported cigarette craving. Results of the current study show that the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, the superior parietal gyrus, and the superior temporal gyrus were more strongly activated in smokers, as compared to controls,  when they had to pay attention to task-relevant information (line counting) while smoking cues were present as distracters (attentional bias). Subjective craving measures during attentional bias correlated with brain activation in the insula and putamen. To our knowledge, this is the first controlled study that shows the  brain regions involved in attentional bias in smokers. The current study demonstrates that brain regions contributing to top-down attentional processing are implicated in attentional bias in smokers, suggesting that smokers have to employ more attentional resources to focus on a standard cognitive task when smoking cues are present.
20932921	22	n = 22
21029780	16	n = 16	Methylphenidate (MPH) is a stimulant drug that amplifies dopamineric and noradrenergic signaling in the brain, which is believed to underlie its cognition enhancing effects. However, the neurobiological effects by which MPH improves cognition are still poorly understood. Here, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used together with working memory (WM) and visual attention (VA) tasks to test the hypothesis that 20mg oral MPH would increase activation in the dorsal attention network (DAN) and deactivation in the default mode network (DMN) as well as improve performance during cognitive tasks in healthy men. The group of subjects that received MPH (MPH group; N=16) had higher activation than  the group of subjects who received no medication (control group: N=16) in DAN regions (parietal and prefrontal cortex, regions increasingly activated with increased cognitive load) and had increased deactivation in the insula and posterior cingulate cortex (regions increasingly deactivated with increased cognitive load) and these effects did not differ for the VA and the WM tasks. These findings provide the first evidence that MPH enhances activation of the DAN whereas it alters DMN deactivation. This suggests that MPH (presumably by amplifying dopamine and noradrenergic signaling) modulates cognition in part through its effects on DAN and DMN.
21029780	16	n = 16
21035788	41	n = 41	BACKGROUND: Use of ketamine as a recreational drug is spreading rapidly among young people all over the world. Epidemiological studies have linked chronic ketamine use with a number of problems, including cognitive impairments, bladder  dysfunction, and ketamine-related death. However, little is known about the long-term effects of ketamine use on brain structure and function. METHODS: We used voxel based morphometry in conjunction with statistical parametric mapping on the structural magnetic resonance images of ketamine-dependent (n = 41) and drug-naive control individuals (n = 44) to assess differences in gray matter volume between the two groups. RESULTS: We observed significant decreases in gray matter volume in bilateral frontal cortex (left superior frontal gyrus and right  middle frontal gyrus) of ketamine users in comparison with control subjects (p <  .05 corrected for multiple comparisons at cluster-level). Duration of ketamine use was negatively correlated with gray matter volume in bilateral frontal cortex, whereas the estimated total lifetime ketamine consumption was negatively  correlated with gray matter volume in left superior frontal gyrus. CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated a reduction in frontal gray matter volume in patients after  chronic ketamine use. The link between frontal gray matter attenuation and the duration of ketamine use and cumulative doses of ketamine perhaps suggests a dose-dependent effect of long-term use of the drug. Our results have important connotations for the clinical picture that is likely to emerge with the growing recreational use of ketamine and is also relevant to the status of the drug as a  model for schizophrenia.
21035788	44	n = 44
21067853	26	n = 26	The impact of prenatal alcohol exposure on memory and brain development was investigated in 92 African-American, young adults who were first identified in the prenatal period. Three groups (Control, n=26; Alcohol-related Neurodevelopmental Disorder, n=36; and Dysmorphic, n=30) were imaged using structural MRI with brain volume calculated for multiple regions of interest. Memory was measured using the Verbal Selective Reminding Memory Test and its nonverbal counterpart, the Nonverbal Selective Reminding Memory Test, which each  yielding measures of learning and recall. For both Verbal and Nonverbal Recall and Slope, linear trends were observed demonstrating a spectrum of deficits associated with prenatal alcohol exposure. Dysmorphic individuals performed significantly poorer than unexposed controls on 5 of 6 memory outcomes. Alcohol-exposed individuals demonstrated significantly lower total brain volume than controls, as well as lower volume in a number of specific regions including  hippocampus. Mediation analyses indicated that memory performance associated with effects of prenatal alcohol exposure was mediated from dysmorphic severity through hippocampal volume, particularly right hippocampus. These results indicate that the association between the physical effects of prenatal alcohol exposure and deficits in memory are mediated by volumetric reduction in specific  brain regions.
21067853	36	n = 36
21067853	30	n = 30
21067898	22	n = 22	We aimed to identify and compare cerebral activations in schizophrenia patients and controls during a working memory (WM) task at the same performance level for  both a verbal and a spatial task. Whereas the performances of the patients (n=22) and controls (n=15) were similar, cerebral activations were significantly increased in the patients, particularly in the thalamus/basal ganglia for the two tasks and in regions of the prefrontal cortex and the cerebellum for the spatial  task only. Our results suggest that stronger activations of deep brain structures in patients may be the result from a compensating mechanism for WM difficulties.
21067898	15	n = 15
21075229	26	n = 26	INTRODUCTION: Reducing fear when a threat has disappeared protects against a continuously elevated anxiety state. In this study, we investigated the brain mechanism involved in this process. METHODS: The threat paradigm consisted of discrete cues that signaled either threat of shock or safety. Healthy participants were tested in two sessions in which eyeblink startle (n = 26) and blood oxygen level dependence (n = 23) were measured to index subjects' defensive state and brain responses respectively. RESULTS: Startle results indicated that subjects could rapidly decrease their defensive state after the offset of shock threat. Functional magnetic resonance imaging data indicated that the termination of threat was associated with the recruitment of lateral and ventromedial prefrontal cortices. An exploratory connectivity analysis showed that activity in these prefrontal regions was linked and was also associated with activity in brain regions typically responding to threat, the right anterior insula and amygdala. CONCLUSIONS: These results provide first evidence for a prefrontal mechanism that functions to control anxiety after threat offset, which may be dysfunctional in patients who suffer from excessive sustained anxiety. Moreover,  the results support a model in which the lateral prefrontal cortex controls anxiety related limbic activity through connections with ventromedial prefrontal  cortex.
21075229	23	n = 23
21077136	1	n = 1	Interregional correlations between blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signals in the resting state have been interpreted as measures of connectivity across the brain. Here we investigate whether such connectivity in the working memory and default mode networks is modulated by changes in cognitive load. Functional connectivity was measured in a steady-state verbal identity N-back task for three different conditions (N = 1, 2, and 3) as well as in the resting state. We found that as cognitive load increases, the functional connectivity within both the working memory the default mode network increases. To test whether functional connectivity between the working memory and the default mode networks changed, we constructed maps of functional connectivity to the working memory network as a whole and found that increasingly negative correlations emerged in a dorsal region of the posterior cingulate cortex. These  results provide further evidence that low frequency fluctuations in BOLD signals  reflect variations in neural activity and suggests interaction between the default mode network and other cognitive networks.
21106812	17	n = 17	Dysfunctional regulation of mood and emotion is a key component of major depressive disorder and leads to sustained negative feelings. Using functional MRI (fMRI), we investigated the temporal dynamics of emotion regulation in patients with major depressive disorder and in healthy controls, testing for acute and sustained neural effects of active emotion regulation. Moderately depressed individuals (n = 17) and never-depressed healthy control subjects (n =  17) underwent fMRI during performance of an active cognitive emotion regulation task while viewing emotionally arousing pictures. In a second task, completed 15  min later, subjects were presented with the same stimuli in a passive viewing task. Whole-brain analyses and connectivity measures were used to determine acute and sustained effects of emotion regulation on brain activation and coupling between regions. On the group level, patients were able to downregulate negative  emotions and corresponding amygdala activation, but this ability decreased with increasing symptom severity. Moreover, only healthy control subjects showed a sustained regulation effect in the amygdala after a 15 min delay, whereas depressed patients did not. Finally, patients exhibited diminished prefrontal activation and reduced prefrontolimbic coupling during active regulation. Although emotion regulation capacity in medicated depressive patients appears to  be preserved depending on symptom severity, the effect is not sustained. Correlational analyses provide evidence that this diminished sustained-regulation effect might be related to reduced prefrontal activation during regulation.
21106812	17	n = 17
21130172	39	n = 39	Exaggerated cardiovascular reactivity to stress is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Further, individual differences in stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity covary with the functionality of corticolimbic brain systems, particularly areas of the cingulate cortex. What remains unclear, however, is how individual differences in personality traits interact with cingulate functionality in the prediction of stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity. Accordingly, we tested the associations between (i) a particular personality trait, Agreeableness, which is associated with emotional reactions to conflict, (ii) resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cortex, and (iii) stressor-evoked blood pressure (BP) reactivity. Participants (N=39, 19  men, aged 20-37 years) completed a resting functional connectivity MRI protocol,  followed by two standardized stressor tasks that engaged conflict processing and  evoked BP reactivity. Agreeableness covaried positively with BP reactivity across individuals. Moreover, connectivity analyses demonstrated that a more positive functional connectivity between the posterior cingulate (BA31) and the perigenual anterior cingulate (BA32) covaried positively with Agreeableness and with BP reactivity. Finally, statistical mediation analyses demonstrated that BA31-BA32 connectivity mediated the covariation between Agreeableness and BP reactivity. Functional connectivity within the cingulate appears to link Agreeableness and a  risk factor for cardiovascular disease, stressor-evoked BP reactivity.
21134472	23	n = 23	Despite significant advances in the treatment of major depression, there is a high degree of variability in how patients respond to treatment. Approximately 70% of patients show some improvement following standard antidepressant treatment and are classified as having non-refractory depressive disorder (NDD), while the  remaining 30% of patients do not respond to treatment and are classified as having refractory depressive disorder (RDD). At present, there are no objective,  neurological markers which can be used to identify individuals with depression and predict clinical outcome. We therefore examined the diagnostic and prognostic potential of pre-treatment structural neuroanatomy using support vector machine (SVM). Sixty-one drug-naive adults suffering from depression and 42 healthy volunteers were scanned using structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI). Patients then received standard antidepressant medication (either tricyclic, typical serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor or typical selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor). Based on clinical outcome, we selected two groups  of RDD (n=23) and NDD (n=23) patients matched for age, sex and pre-treatment severity of depression. Diagnostic accuracy of gray matter was 67.39% for RDD (p=0.01) and 76.09% for NDD (p<0.001), while diagnostic accuracy of white matter  was 58.70% for RDD (p=0.13) and 84.65% for NDD (p<0.001). SVM applied to gray matter correctly distinguished between RDD and NDD patients with an accuracy of 69.57% (p=0.006); in contrast, SVM applied to white matter predicted clinical outcome with an accuracy of 65.22% (p=0.02). These results indicate that both gray and white matter have diagnostic and prognostic potential in major depression and may provide an initial step towards the use of biological markers  to inform clinical treatment. Future studies will benefit from the integration of structural neuroimaging with other imaging modalities as well as genetic, clinical and cognitive information.
21134472	23	n = 23
21159973	100	n = 100	Identifying high-risk populations is an important component of disease prevention strategies. One approach for identifying at-risk populations for Alzheimer's disease (AD) is examining neuroimaging parameters that differ between patients, including functional connections known to be disrupted within the default-mode network. We have previously shown these same disruptions in cognitively normal elderly who have amyloid-beta (Abeta) plaques [detected using Pittsburgh Compound B (PIB) PET imaging], suggesting neuronal toxicity of plaques. Here we sought to  determine if pathological effects of apolipoprotein E epsilon4 (APOE4) genotype could be seen independent of Abeta plaque toxicity by examining resting state fMRI functional connectivity (fcMRI) in participants without preclinical fibrillar amyloid deposition (PIB-). Cognitively normal participants enrolled in  longitudinal studies (n = 100, mean age = 62) who were PIB- were categorized into those with and without an APOE4 allele and studied using fcMRI. APOE4 allele carriers (E4+) differed significantly from E4- in functional connectivity of the  precuneus to several regions previously defined as having abnormal connectivity in a group of AD participants. These effects were observed before any manifestations of cognitive changes and in the absence of brain fibrillar Abeta plaque deposition, suggesting that early manifestations of a genetic effect can be detected using fcMRI and that these changes may antedate the pathological effects of fibrillar amyloid plaque toxicity.
21175881	45	n = 45	Logographic symbols are visually complex, and thus children's abilities for visual short-term memory (VSTM) predict their reading competence in logographic systems. In the present study, we investigated the importance of VSTM in logographic reading in adults, both behaviorally and by means of fMRI. Outside the scanner, VSTM predicted logographic Kanji reading in native Japanese adults (n=45), a finding consistent with previous observations in Japanese children. In  the scanner, participants (n=15) were asked to perform a visual one-back task. For this fMRI experiment, we took advantage of the unique linguistic characteristic of the Japanese writing system, whereby syllabic Kana and logographic Kanji can share the same sound and meaning, but differ only in the complexity of their visual features. Kanji elicited greater activation than Kana  in the cerebellum and two regions associated with VSTM, the lateral occipital complex and the superior intraparietal sulcus, bilaterally. The same regions elicited the highest activation during the control condition (an unfamiliar, unpronounceable script to the participants), presumably due to the increased VSTM demands for processing the control script. In addition, individual differences in VSTM performance (outside the scanner) significantly predicted blood oxygen level-dependent signal changes in the identified VSTM regions, during the Kanji and control conditions, but not during the Kana condition. VSTM appears to play an important role in reading logographic words, even in skilled adults, as evidenced at the behavioral and neural level, most likely due to the increased VSTM/visual attention demands necessary for processing complex visual features inherent in logographic symbols.
21175881	15	n = 15
21181786	17	n = 17	Theta burst stimulation (TBS) is a protocol of subthreshold repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) inducing changes in cortical excitability. From functional imaging studies with conventional subthreshold rTMS protocols, it remains unclear what type of modulation occurs (direction and dependency to neural activity) and whether putative effects are bound to unspecific changes in cerebral perfusion or require a functional challenge. In a  within-subjects (n = 17) repeated measurement design including real TBS and a control session without stimulation, we examined neural activation in a choice-reaction task after application of intermittent TBS, a protocol, which enhances cortical excitability over the left motor cortex (M1). Brain activity was monitored by blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging interleaved with measuring regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF)  at rest using MR-based perfusion imaging. On a separate day, TMS-induced compound muscle action potentials (cMAPs) amplitude of the right hand was measured after excitatory TBS. Compared to control, a significant decrease in BOLD signal due to right hand motor activity during the choice-reaction task was observed mainly in  the stimulated M1 and motor-related remote areas after stimulation. This decrease might represent a facilitating effect, because cMAPs amplitude increased upon TBS compared to control. No changes in rCBF at rest were observed. The data demonstrate that subthreshold intermittent TBS targets both the stimulated cortical area as well as remote areas. The facilitation changing the efficacy of  neural signal transmission seems to be reflected by a BOLD signal decrease, whereas the network at rest does not appear to be affected.
21195187	1	n = 1	Working memory for sound identity (What) and sound location (Where) has been associated with increased neural activity in ventral and dorsal brain regions, respectively. To further ascertain this domain specificity, we measured fMRI signals during an n-back (n=1, 2) working memory task for sound identity or location, where stimuli selected randomly from three semantic categories (human,  animal, and music) were presented at three possible virtual locations. Accuracy and reaction times were comparable in both "What" and "Where" tasks, albeit worse for the 2-back than for the 1-back condition. The analysis of fMRI data revealed  greater activity in ventral and dorsal brain regions during sound identity and sound location, respectively. More importantly, there was an interaction between  task and working memory load in the inferior parietal lobule (IPL). Within the right IPL, there were two sub-regions modulated differentially by working memory  load: an anterior ventromedial region modulated by location load and a posterior  dorsolateral region modulated by category load. These specific changes in neural  activity as a function of working memory load reveal domain-specificity within the parietal cortex.
21254805	44	n = 44	In two fMRI experiments (n = 44) using tasks with different demands-approach-avoidance versus one-back recognition decisions-we measured the  responses to the social value of faces. The face stimuli were produced by a parametric model of face evaluation that reduces multiple social evaluations to two orthogonal dimensions of valence and power [Oosterhof, N. N., & Todorov, A. The functional basis of face evaluation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 105, 11087-11092, 2008]. Independent of the task, the response  within regions of the occipital, fusiform, and lateral prefrontal cortices was sensitive to the valence dimension, with larger responses to low-valence faces. Additionally, there were extensive quadratic responses in the fusiform gyri and dorsal amygdala, with larger responses to faces at the extremes of the face valence continuum than faces in the middle. In all these regions, participants' avoidance decisions correlated with brain responses, with faces more likely to be avoided evoking stronger responses. The findings suggest that both explicit and implicit face evaluation engage multiple brain regions involved in attention, affect, and decision making.
21255661	31	n = 31	Parkinson's disease (PD) is associated with abnormal hypersynchronicity in basal  ganglia-thalamo-cortical loops. The clinical effectiveness of subthalamic nucleus (STN) high frequency stimulation indicates a crucial role of this nucleus within  the affected motor networks in PD. Here we investigate alterations in the functional connectivity (FC) profile of the STN using resting state BOLD correlations on a voxel-by-voxel basis in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). We compared early stage PD patients (n=31) during the medication-off state with healthy controls (n=44). The analysis revealed increased FC between the STN and cortical motor areas (BA 4 and 6) in PD patients in accordance with electrophysiological studies. Moreover, FC analysis of the primary motor cortex (M1) hand area revealed that the FC increase was primarily found in the STN area  within the basal ganglia. These findings are in good agreement with recent experimental data, suggesting that an increased STN-motor cortex synchronicity mediated via the so called hyperdirect motor cortex-subthalamic pathway might play a fundamental role in the pathophysiology of PD. An additional subgroup analysis was performed according to the presence (n=16) or absence (n=15) of tremor in patients. Compared to healthy controls tremor patients showed increased STN FC specifically in the hand area of M1 and the primary sensory cortex. In non-tremor patients, increased FC values were also found between the STN and midline cortical motor areas including the SMA. Taken together our results underline the importance of the STN as a key node for the modulation of BG-cortical motor network activity in PD patients.
21255661	44	n = 44
21255661	16	n = 16
21255661	15	n = 15
21292243	15	n = 15	BACKGROUND: In alcohol-dependent patients, alcohol-associated cues elicit brain activation in mesocorticolimbic networks involved in relapse mechanisms. Cue-exposure based extinction training (CET) has been shown to be efficacious in  the treatment of alcoholism; however, it has remained unexplored whether CET mediates its therapeutic effects via changes of activity in mesolimbic networks in response to alcohol cues. In this study, we assessed CET treatment effects on  cue-induced responses using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). METHODS: In a randomized controlled trial, abstinent alcohol-dependent patients were randomly assigned to a CET group (n = 15) or a control group (n = 15). All patients underwent an extended detoxification treatment comprising medically supervised detoxification, health education, and supportive therapy. The CET patients additionally received nine CET sessions over 3 weeks, exposing the patient to his/her preferred alcoholic beverage. Cue-induced fMRI activation to alcohol cues was measured at pretreatment and posttreatment. RESULTS: Compared with pretreatment, fMRI cue-reactivity reduction was greater in the CET relative  to the control group, especially in the anterior cingulate gyrus and the insula,  as well as limbic and frontal regions. Before treatment, increased cue-induced fMRI activation was found in limbic and reward-related brain regions and in visual areas. After treatment, the CET group showed less activation than the control group in the left ventral striatum. CONCLUSIONS: The study provides first evidence that an exposure-based psychotherapeutic intervention in the treatment of alcoholism impacts on brain areas relevant for addiction memory and attentional focus to alcohol-associated cues and affects mesocorticolimbic reward pathways suggested to be pathophysiologically involved in addiction.
21292243	15	n = 15
21334351	15	n = 15	Impulsivity has been associated with several psychiatric disorders including drug addiction and gambling. Impulsive subjects typically have a preference for short-term over long-term rewards and make risky choices. This study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate the neural correlates of self-rated impulsivity and venturesomeness during tasks involving delayed and  risky choice. A broader sampling approach was taken by recruiting participants with behaviors that have been linked to impulsivity (gambling N=15, and recreational drug use N=10) and those without these behaviors (N=9). Selection between delayed or probabilistic rewards was associated with activation in fronto-parietal regions in line with previous research. When selecting between delayed rewards, activity within the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex correlated positively with impulsivity scores while activity within the orbitofrontal cortex, subgenual anterior cingulate cortex and caudate correlated positively with venturesomeness scores. Selection between probabilistic rewards revealed no correlation between scores and regional activations. The results from this study provide targets for future research investigating the neural substrates of impulsivity. They also provide targets for the further investigation into the pathophysiology of addiction and impulse-control disorders.
21334351	10	n = 10
21334351	9	n = 9
21349336	18	n = 18	The transition from adolescence to adulthood is a critical stage in the human lifespan during which the brain still undergoes substantial structural and functional change. The changing frequency composition of the resting state EEG reflects maturation of brain function. This study investigated (post)adolescent brain maturation captured by two independently but simultaneously recorded neuronal signals: EEG and fMRI. Data were collected in a 20 min eyes-open/eyes-closed resting state paradigm. EEG, fMRI-BOLD signal and EEG-BOLD  correlations were compared between groups of adults, age 25 (n=18), and adolescents, age 15 (n=18). A typical developmental decrease of low-frequency EEG power was observed even at this late stage of brain maturation. Frequency and condition specific EEG-fMRI correlations proved robust for multiple brain regions. However, no consistent change in the EEG-BOLD correlations was identified that would correspond to the neuronal maturation captured by the EEG.  This result indicates that the EEG-BOLD correlation measures a distinct aspect of neurophysiological activity that presumably matures earlier, since it is less sensitive to late maturation than the neuronal activity captured by low-frequency EEG.
21349336	18	n = 18
21354189	23	n = 23	Risk avoidance is a hallmark of psychopathological conditions such as anxiety disorders. Yet few studies have examined its neural basis. The present work sought to identify the neural correlates of risk avoidance. While functional MRI  scans were acquired, healthy adults (N=23) played a Wheel of Fortune game during  which they chose to bet or pass on each of 104 proposed gamble trials. Participants also completed the Cognitive Appraisal of Risky Events (CARE, Fromme et al., 1997), a self-report measure of "real world" risky behavior. As expected, decision-making was associated with activation, as measured by increased BOLD responses, of the striatum, insula, anterior cingulate cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and parietal lobe. Risk avoidance during probabilistic trials  (percent of trials passed) was significantly correlated with precuneus and striatal responses to trials with a certain outcome (No-Risk). Similarly, "real world" risk avoidance, as measured by the CARE, was significantly correlated with precuneus activity during No-Risk trials. Collectively, these data suggest that precuneus and striatal responses to decision-making under certainty represent putative neural markers of risk avoidance in the laboratory and in the "real world." Further, they underline the need to extend neuroimaging research on risk  avoidance, and associated anxiety disorders, to posterior cortical regions.
21376542	33	n = 33	Three risk variants (rs1538979, rs821577, and rs821633) in the Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia-1 (DISC1) gene have previously been associated with both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in a recent collaborative analysis of European cohorts. In this study we examined the effects of these risk variants on brain activation during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of the Hayling Sentence Completion Task (HSCT) in healthy volunteers (n=33), patients with schizophrenia (n=20) and patients with bipolar disorder (n=36). In the healthy controls the risk associated allele carriers of SNPs rs1538979 and rs821633 demonstrated decreased activation of the cuneus. Moreover, there was an  effect of SNP rs1538979 in the pre/postcentral gyrus with decreased activation in healthy controls and increased activation in patients with schizophrenia. In the  bipolar group there was decreased activation in the risk carriers of SNP rs821633 in the inferior parietal lobule and left cingulate cortex. Clusters in the precentral gyrus, left middle temporal gyrus and left cerebellum were found to be significant on examining the group x genotype interactions. These findings may provide a better understanding of the neural effects of DISC1 variants and on the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
21376542	20	n = 20
21376542	36	n = 36
21390505	17	n = 17	RATIONALE: Neural deficits at the interface of affect and cognition may improve with pharmacotherapy in pediatric bipolar disorder (PBD). OBJECTIVES: We examined lamotrigine treatment impact on the neural interface of working memory and affect in PBD. METHODS: Un-medicated, acutely ill, patients with mania and hypomania (n  = 17), and healthy controls (HC; n = 13; mean age = 13.36 +/- 2.55) performed an  affective two-back functional magnetic resonance imaging task with blocks of angry vs neutral faces (i.e., angry face condition) or happy vs neutral faces (i.e., happy face condition) before treatment and at follow-up, after 8-week treatment with second-generation antipsychotics followed by 6 weeks of lamotrigine monotherapy. RESULTS: At baseline, for the angry face condition, PBD, relative to HC, showed reduced activation in the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and right caudate; for the happy face condition, PBD showed increased activation in bilateral PFC and right amygdala and middle temporal gyrus. Post-treatment, PBD showed greater activation in right amygdala relative to HC for both conditions. Patients, relative to HC, exhibited greater changes over time in the right VLPFC and amygdala, left subgenual anterior cingulate cortex and left caudate for the angry face condition, and in right middle temporal gyrus for the happy face condition. CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacotherapy resulted in symptom improvement and normalization of higher cortical emotional and cognitive regions in patients relative to HC, suggesting that the VLPFC dysfunction may be state-specific in PBD. Amygdala was overactive in PBD, relative to HC, regardless of reduction in manic symptoms, and may be a trait marker of PBD.
21390505	13	n = 13
21414910	32	n = 32	Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex (RLPFC) plays a key role in our ability to postpone the execution of intended behaviors until after another activity has been performed. However, it is poorly understood in computational terms. One crucial question is whether RLPFC represents the content of delayed intentions or plays a nonspecific role. In this human functional magnetic resonance imaging study (n = 32), RLPFC was active while participants stored delayed intentions during a distracting ongoing task. Multivariate analysis showed that the intended cue for future action and the intended behavior could be decoded from distinct posterior brain regions. However, the content of intentions could not be decoded  from RLPFC itself. Functional connectivity analysis showed that RLPFC increased its coupling with content-representing regions during intention storage. Furthermore, trials with relatively high RLPFC activity were associated with enhanced decoding. Thus, RLPFC may enable realization of delayed intentions via interactions with posterior brain regions, which represent their content.
21440645	13	n = 13	Drug-related stimuli, through conditioning, are thought to acquire incentive motivational properties that code possible reward availability and elicit an attentional bias, possibly through increased "bottom-up" neural processing. The processes underlying this attentional bias are considered important in the maintenance of addiction, and crucially, in relapse among substance users attempting to remain abstinent. Equally, impaired "top-down" cognitive control may impair the ability to restrain "bottom-up" pre-potent behaviours, such as drug use, following exposure to drug-related stimuli. Two experiments sought to identify the neural loci of bottom-up/top-down processing during fMRI. Experiment 1 utilised an attentional bias paradigm to examine the behavioural and neural responses to neutral, emotionally evocative and smoking-related cues in control (n=13), ex-smoking (n=10 - abstinent >12months) and smoking (n=13 - mean >6.5years of use) groups. Experiment 2 used a go/no-go paradigm to examine the neural correlates of motor response inhibition and error monitoring in the same sample. The results of Experiment 1 demonstrated that, across conditions, current smokers had significantly less neural activity in cortical but significantly more activity in subcortical areas compared to both controls and ex-smokers. Ex-smokers exhibited more neural activity than both control and smoker groups in  prefrontal cortical regions. Similarly, Experiment 2 revealed that smokers had reduced neural activity in prefrontal cortical regions during motor response inhibition compared to controls while ex-smokers demonstrated greater neural activity in prefrontal cortical regions compared to both controls and smokers during error monitoring. The results reveal cortical and subcortical differences  between current smokers and controls and a general pattern of increased prefrontal cortical activity in ex-smokers. These findings may suggest that elevated topdown control might be an important characteristic of successful abstinence in individuals formerly dependent on nicotine.
21440645	10	n = 10
21440645	13	n = 13
21447350	6	n = 6	Since the seminal work of Broca in 1861, it is well established that language is  essentially processed in the left hemisphere. However, the origin of hemispheric  specialization remains controversial. Some authors posit that language lateralization is genetically determined, while others have suggested that hemispheric specialization develops with age. Tenants of the latter view have further suggested that the adult pattern of left hemispheric specialization is achieved by means of callosal inhibition of homologous speech areas in the right  hemisphere during ontogeny. According to this hypothesis, one would expect language to develop bilaterally in the acallosal brain. A recent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study in one patient with agenesis of the corpus callosum suggests that this might indeed be the case (Riecker et al., 2007). However, given the large anatomic and functional variability in the population of subjects with agenesis of the corpus callosum, this finding needs to be more extensively replicated. In the present study, we explored language lateralization in six individuals with agenesis of the corpus callosum using an fMRI protocol which included a syntactic decision task and a sub-vocal verbal fluency task. Two neurologically intact control groups, one comparable to the acallosals in terms of IQ, age and education (n=6) and one group with a high IQ (n=5), performed the same tasks. No differences were found between language lateralization of the subjects with agenesis of the corpus callosum and the control groups in the receptive speech task. However, for expressive speech, the  groups differed with respect to frontal activations, with the acallosal participants showing a more bilateral pattern of activation than the high-IQ participants only. No differences were found for temporal regions. Overall, these results indicate that the corpus callosum is not essential for the establishment  of lateralized language functions.
21447350	5	n = 5
21482548	15	n = 15	The dopamine system has been linked to anhedonia in depression and both the positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia, but it remains unclear how dopamine dysfunction could mechanistically relate to observed symptoms. There is  considerable evidence that phasic dopamine signals encode prediction error (differences between expected and actual outcomes), with reinforcement learning theories being based on prediction error-mediated learning of associations. It has been hypothesized that abnormal encoding of neural prediction error signals could underlie anhedonia in depression and negative symptoms in schizophrenia by  disrupting learning and blunting the salience of rewarding events, and contribute to psychotic symptoms by promoting aberrant perceptions and the formation of delusions. To test this, we used model based functional magnetic resonance imaging and an instrumental reward-learning task to investigate the neural correlates of prediction errors and expected-reward values in patients with depression (n=15), patients with schizophrenia (n=14) and healthy controls (n=17). Both patient groups exhibited abnormalities in neural prediction errors,  but the spatial pattern of abnormality differed, with the degree of abnormality correlating with syndrome severity. Specifically, reduced prediction errors in the striatum and midbrain were found in depression, with the extent of signal reduction in the bilateral caudate, nucleus accumbens and midbrain correlating with increased anhedonia severity. In schizophrenia, reduced prediction error signals were observed in the caudate, thalamus, insula and amygdala-hippocampal complex, with a trend for reduced prediction errors in the midbrain, and the degree of blunting in the encoding of prediction errors in the insula, amygdala-hippocampal complex and midbrain correlating with increased severity of  psychotic symptoms. Schizophrenia was also associated with disruption in the encoding of expected-reward values in the bilateral amygdala-hippocampal complex  and parahippocampal gyrus, with the degree of disruption correlating with psychotic symptom severity. Neural signal abnormalities did not correlate with negative symptom severity in schizophrenia. These findings support the suggestion that a disruption in the encoding of prediction error signals contributes to anhedonia symptoms in depression. In schizophrenia, the findings support the postulate of an abnormality in error-dependent updating of inferences and beliefs driving psychotic symptoms. Phasic dopamine abnormalities in depression and schizophrenia are suggested by our observation of prediction error abnormalities  in dopamine-rich brain areas, given the evidence for dopamine encoding prediction errors. The findings are consistent with proposals that psychiatric syndromes reflect different disorders of neural valuation and incentive salience formation, which helps bridge the gap between biological and phenomenological levels of understanding.
21482548	14	n = 14
21482548	17	n = 17
21483761	13	n = 13	Cerebral language lateralization can be assessed in several ways. In healthy subjects, functional MRI (fMRI) during performance of a language task has evolved to be the most frequently applied method. Functional transcranial Doppler (fTCD)  may provide a valid alternative, but has been used rarely. Both techniques have their own strengths and weaknesses and as a result may be applied in different fields of research. Until now, only one relatively small study (n = 13) investigated the correlation between lateralization indices (LIs) measured by fTCD and fMRI and showed a remarkably high correlation. To further evaluate the correlation between LIs measured with fTCD and fMRI, we compared LIs of 22 healthy subjects (12 left- and 10 right-handed) using the same word generation paradigm for the fTCD as for the fMRI experiment. LIs measured with fTCD were highly but imperfectly correlated with LIs measured with fMRI (Spearman's rho = 0.75, p < 0.001). The imperfectness of the correlation can partially be explained by methodological restrictions of fMRI as well as fTCD. Our results suggest that  fTCD can be a valid alternative for fMRI to measure lateralization, particularly  when costs or mobility are important factors in the study design.
21514925	322	n = 322	BACKGROUND: The Valine158Methionine (Val158Met) polymorphism of the COMT gene leads to lower enzymatic activity and higher dopamine availability in Met carriers. The Met allele is associated with better performance and reduced prefrontal cortex activation during working memory (WM) tasks in adults. Dopaminergic system changes during adolescence may lead to a reduction of basal dopamine levels, potentially affecting Met allele benefits during development. METHODS: We investigated the association of COMT genotype with behavioral (n = 322) and magnetic resonance imaging data (n = 81-84) collected during performance of a visuospatial WM task and potential changes in these effects during development (reflected in age x genotype interactions). Data were collected from  a cross-sectional and longitudinal typically developing sample of 6- to 20-year-olds. RESULTS: Visuospatial WM capacity exhibited an age x genotype interaction, with a benefit of the Met allele emerging after 10 years of age. There was a parallel age x genotype interaction on WM-related activation in the right inferior frontal gyrus and intraparietal sulcus (IPS), with increases in activation with age in the Val/Val group only. Main effects of COMT genotype were also observed in the IPS, with greater gray matter volumes bilaterally and greater right IPS activation in the Val/Val group compared with the Met carriers. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that COMT genotype effects on WM brain activity and behavior are not static during development. The full developmental picture should be considered when trying to understand the impact of genetic polymorphisms on the mature cognition of healthy adult or psychiatric populations.
21514925	81	n = 81
21527789	48	n = 48	People are able to rapidly infer complex personality traits and mental states even from the most minimal person information. Research has shown that when observers view a natural scene containing people, they spend a disproportionate amount of their time looking at the social features (e.g., faces, bodies). Does this preference for social features merely reflect the biological salience of these features or are observers spontaneously attempting to make sense of complex social dynamics? Using functional neuroimaging, we investigated neural responses  to social and nonsocial visual scenes in a large sample of participants (n = 48)  who varied on an individual difference measure assessing empathy and mentalizing  (i.e., empathizing). Compared with other scene categories, viewing natural social scenes activated regions associated with social cognition (e.g., dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and temporal poles). Moreover, activity in these regions during social scene viewing was strongly correlated with individual differences in empathizing. These findings offer neural evidence that observers spontaneously engage in social cognition when viewing complex social material but that the degree to which people do so is mediated by individual differences in trait empathizing.
21531480	37	n = 37	We sought to describe change in cardiorespiratory (CR) fitness over 2 years in those with early-stage Alzheimer's disease (AD) and nondemented aging and assess  the relationship of CR fitness with cognitive decline, brain atrophy, and dementia progression. Individuals with early-stage AD (n = 37) and without dementia (n = 53) attended clinical evaluations, cognitive and exercise tests, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at baseline and 2 years later. CR fitness was lower in those with AD over the study period. Lower baseline CR fitness was associated with progression of dementia severity in AD. Declining CR fitness over 2 years was associated with brain atrophy in AD, especially in the parahippocampus. In nondemented participants, there was a trend for lower baseline fitness to be related to cognitive decline. Both lower baseline CR fitness and declining CR fitness over 2 years were associated with regional brain atrophy. We conclude that CR fitness is chronically reduced in those with AD. Further, in those with AD, CR fitness is associated with progression of dementia  severity and brain atrophy in AD, suggesting a link between progression of dementia severity and cardiorespiratory health.
21531480	53	n = 53
21543191	8	n = 8	Cognitive remediation therapy (CRT) is a non biological treatment that aims to correct cognitive deficits through repeated exercises. Its efficacy in patients with schizophrenia is well recognized, but little is known about its effect on cerebral activity. Our aim was to explore the impact of CRT on cerebral activation using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in patients with schizophrenia. Seventeen patients and 15 healthy volunteers were recruited. Patients were divided into two groups: one group received CRT with Rehacom(R) software (n=8), while a control group of patients (non-CRT group) received no additional treatment (n=9). The three groups underwent two fMRI sessions with an  interval of 3months: they had to perform a verbal and a spatial n-back task at the same performance level. Patients were additionally clinically and cognitively assessed before and after the study. After CRT, the CRT group exhibited brain over-activations in the left inferior/middle frontal gyrus, cingulate gyrus and inferior parietal lobule for the spatial task. Similar but nonsignificant over-activations were observed in the same brain regions for the verbal task. Moreover, CRT patients significantly improved their behavioural performance in attention and reasoning capacities. We conclude that CRT leads to measurable physiological adaptation associated with improved cognitive ability. Trial name:  Cognitive Remediation Theraphy and Schizophrenia. http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01078129. Registration number: NCT01078129.
21543191	9	n = 9
21546221	15	n = 15	Cocaine use is associated with poorer HIV clinical outcomes and may contribute to neurobiological impairments associated with impulsive decision making. This study examined the effect of cocaine dependence on brain activation during a delay discounting task involving choices between smaller immediate rewards and larger delayed ones. Participants were 39 HIV-positive adults on antiretroviral therapy  who had current cocaine dependence ("active," n=15), past cocaine dependence ("recovered," n=13), or no lifetime substance dependence ("naive," n=11). Based on responses on a traditional delay discounting task, three types of choices were individualized for presentation during functional magnetic resonance imaging: hard (similarly valued), easy (disparately valued), and no (single option). Active participants had significantly smaller increases in activation than naive  participants during hard versus easy choices bilaterally in the precentral gyrus  and anterior cingulate cortex and in the right frontal pole (including dorsolateral, ventrolateral, and orbitofrontal cortex). During hard and easy choices relative to no choices, active participants had smaller increases in activation compared to naive participants in frontoparietal cortical regions. These deficits in the executive network during delay discounting choices may contribute to impulsive decision making among HIV-positive cocaine users, with implications for risk behaviors associated with disease transmission and progression.
21546221	13	n = 13
21546221	11	n = 11
21567661	14	n = 14	Many neuroimaging investigations focus on hepatic encephalopathy (HE); however, few investigate default-mode network (DMN) in the patients with HE and its underlying physiological relevance using resting-state fMRI. In this study, independent component analysis was used to retrieve components representing the DMN of patients with HE (n = 14) and healthy volunteers (n = 14). Four patients were excluded because of head motion (n = 3) and the artifact from the artificial tooth (n = 1). Comparison results between the two groups revealed significantly reduced functional connectivity in the right middle frontal gyrus and left posterior cingulate cortex in the HE patients. A statistical t-map from the comparison of venous blood ammonia levels and the z-scores of the DMN obtained from independent component analysis was computed in the HE group, which showed negative correlation with the changes in left angular gyrus. In conclusions, resting-state fMRI can be used to examine DMN changes in HE patients. Reduced functional connectivity in the right middle frontal gyrus and left posterior cingulate cortex consisting of the DMN and negative correlation between the functional connectivity changes in left AG and the venous blood ammonia levels support the notion of damages in functional organization of the central nervous system in HE patients.
21567661	14	n = 14
21567661	3	n = 3
21567661	1	n = 1
21571075	26	n = 26	Investigating auditory hallucinations that occur in health may help elucidate brain mechanisms which lead to the pathological experience of auditory hallucinations in neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia. In this study, we investigated healthy individuals who reported auditory hallucinations whilst falling asleep (hypnagogic hallucinations; HG) and waking up (hypnopompic  hallucinations; HP). In an initial behavioural study, we found that subjects with a history of auditory HG/HP hallucinations (n = 26) reported significantly greater subjective sensitivity to environmental sounds than non-hallucinator controls (n = 74). Then, two fMRI experiments were performed. The first examined  speech-evoked brain activation in 12 subjects with a history of auditory HG/HP hallucinations and 12 non-hallucinator controls matched for age, gender and IQ. The second fMRI experiment, in the same subjects, probed how brain activation was modulated by auditory attention using a bimodal selective attention paradigm. In  the first experiment, the hallucinator group demonstrated significantly greater speech-evoked activation in the left supramarginal gyrus than the control group.  In the second experiment, directing attention towards the auditory (vs. visual) modality induced significantly greater activation of the anterior cingulate gyrus in the hallucinator group than in the control group. These results suggest that hallucination proneness is associated with increased sensitivity of auditory and  polysensory association cortex to auditory stimulation, an effect which might arise due to enhanced attentional bias from the anterior cingulate gyrus. Our data support the overarching hypothesis that top-down modulation of auditory cortical response characteristics may be a key mechanistic step in the generation of auditory hallucinations.
21571075	74	n = 74
21593339	18	n = 18	Chronic pain is associated with reduced brain gray matter and impaired cognitive  ability. In this longitudinal study, we assessed whether neuroanatomical and functional abnormalities were reversible and dependent on treatment outcomes. We  acquired MRI scans from chronic low back pain (CLBP) patients before (n = 18) and 6 months after (spine surgery or facet joint injections; n = 14) treatment. In addition, we scanned 16 healthy controls, 10 of which returned 6 months after the first visit. We performed cortical thickness analysis on structural MRI scans, and subjects performed a cognitive task during the functional MRI. We compared patients and controls, as well as patients before versus after treatment. After treatment, patients had increased cortical thickness in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), which was thinner before treatment compared with controls. Increased DLPFC thickness correlated with the reduction of both pain and physical disability. Additionally, increased thickness in primary motor cortex was associated specifically with reduced physical disability, and right anterior insula was associated specifically with reduced pain. Left DLPFC activity during an attention-demanding cognitive task was abnormal before treatment, but normalized following treatment. These data indicate that functional and structural brain abnormalities-specifically in the left DLPFC-are  reversible, suggesting that treating chronic pain can restore normal brain function in humans.
21593339	14	n = 14
21601433	15	n = 15	Generalized social phobia (GSP) involves the fear of being negatively evaluated.  Previous work suggests that self-referentiality, mediated by the medial prefrontal cortex (MFPC), plays an important role in the disorder. However, it is not clear whether this anomalous MPFC response to self-related information in patients with GSP concerns an increased representation of their own or others' opinions. In this article, we examine whether GSP is associated with increased response to own (1st person) or other individuals' (2nd person) opinions relative to healthy individuals. Unmedicated individuals with GSP (n=15) and age-, IQ-, and gender-matched comparison individuals (n=15) read 1st (e.g., I'm ugly), and 2nd (e.g., You're ugly) person viewpoint comments during functional magnetic resonance imaging. We observed significant group-by-viewpoint interactions within the ventral MPFC. Whereas the healthy comparison individuals showed significantly increased (or less decreased) BOLD responses to 1st relative to 2nd person viewpoints, the patients showed significantly increased responses to 2nd relative to 1st person viewpoints. The reduced BOLD responses to 1st person viewpoint comments shown by the patients correlated significantly with severity of social anxiety symptom severity. These results underscore the importance of dysfunctional self-referential processing and MPFC in GSP. We believe that these  data reflect a reorganization of self-referential reasoning in the disorder with  a self-concept perhaps atypically related to the view of others.
21601433	15	n = 15
21601833	19	n = 19	BACKGROUND: Anhedonia and lack of motivation are core symptoms of major depressive disorder (MDD). Neuroimaging studies in MDD patients have shown reductions in reward-related activity in terminal regions of the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) system, such as the ventral striatum. Monoamines have been implicated in both mesolimbic incentive processing and the mechanism of action of antidepressant drugs. However, not much is known about antidepressant effects on  mesolimbic incentive processing in humans, which might be related to the effects  on anhedonia. METHODS: To investigate the short-term effects of antidepressants on reward-related activity in the ventral striatum, we investigated the effect of the combined serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor duloxetine. Healthy volunteers underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. After taking duloxetine (60 mg once a day) or placebo for 14 days, participants completed a monetary incentive delay task that activates the ventral striatum during reward anticipation. RESULTS: Our results (n = 19) show enhanced ventral striatal responses after duloxetine administration compared with placebo. Moreover, this increase in ventral striatal activity was positively correlated with duloxetine plasma levels. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to demonstrate that antidepressants  augment neural activity in mesolimbic DA incentive processing circuits in healthy volunteers. These effects are likely caused by the increase in monoamine neurotransmission in the ventral striatum. Our findings suggest that antidepressants may alleviate anhedonia by stimulating incentive processing.
21609968	24	n = 24	Recent research indicates gender differences in the impact of stress on decision  behavior, but little is known about the brain mechanisms involved in these gender-specific stress effects. The current study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to determine whether induced stress resulted in gender-specific patterns of brain activation during a decision task involving monetary reward. Specifically, we manipulated physiological stress levels using a cold pressor task, prior to a risky decision making task. Healthy men (n = 24, 12 stressed) and women (n = 23, 11 stressed) completed the decision task after either cold pressor stress or a control task during the period of cortisol response to the cold pressor. Gender differences in behavior were present in stressed participants but not controls, such that stress led to greater reward collection and faster decision speed in males but less reward collection and slower decision speed in females. A gender-by-stress interaction was observed for the dorsal striatum and anterior insula. With cold stress, activation in these regions was increased in males but decreased in females. The findings of this study indicate that the impact of stress on reward-related decision processing differs depending on gender.
21609968	23	n = 23
21620984	45	n = 45	Early elementary schooling in 2nd and 3rd grades (ages 7-9) is an important period for the acquisition and mastery of basic mathematical skills. Yet, we know very little about neurodevelopmental changes that might occur over a year of schooling. Here we examine behavioral and neurodevelopmental changes underlying arithmetic problem solving in a well-matched group of 2nd (n = 45) and 3rd (n = 45) grade children. Although 2nd and 3rd graders did not differ on IQ or grade- and age-normed measures of math, reading and working memory, 3rd graders had higher raw math scores (effect sizes = 1.46-1.49) and were more accurate than 2nd graders in an fMRI task involving verification of simple and complex two-operand  addition problems (effect size = 0.43). In both 2nd and 3rd graders, arithmetic complexity was associated with increased responses in right inferior frontal sulcus and anterior insula, regions implicated in domain-general cognitive control, and in left intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and superior parietal lobule (SPL) regions important for numerical and arithmetic processing. Compared to 2nd  graders, 3rd graders showed greater activity in dorsal stream parietal areas right SPL, IPS and angular gyrus (AG) as well as ventral visual stream areas bilateral lingual gyrus (LG), right lateral occipital cortex (LOC) and right parahippocampal gyrus (PHG). Significant differences were also observed in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), with 3rd graders showing greater activation in left dorsal lateral PFC (dlPFC) and greater deactivation in the ventral medial PFC (vmPFC). Third graders also showed greater functional connectivity between the left dlPFC and multiple posterior brain areas, with larger differences in dorsal  stream parietal areas SPL and AG, compared to ventral stream visual areas LG, LOC and PHG. No such between-grade differences were observed in functional connectivity between the vmPFC and posterior brain regions. These results suggest that even the narrow one-year interval spanning grades 2 and 3 is characterized by significant arithmetic task-related changes in brain response and connectivity, and argue that pooling data across wide age ranges and grades can miss important neurodevelopmental changes. Our findings have important implications for understanding brain mechanisms mediating early maturation of mathematical skills and, more generally, for educational neuroscience.
21620984	45	n = 45
21664280	18	n = 18	Whereas we know a fair amount on the role of the amygdala in the acute stress response, virtually nothing is known about its role during the recovery period after the stress has waned. Functional connectivity analysis of the amygdala during this period might be useful in revealing brain circuits promoting adaptive recovery from a stressful event, as well as consolidation of emotionally relevant information in preparing for future challenges. Healthy participants were randomly assigned to either a psychosocial stress task (n=18; stress group) or a  comparable non-stressful control procedure (n=20; controls). To study the prolonged effects of stress on amygdala functional connectivity, resting-state fMRI scans were acquired an hour after the stress task. Amygdala functional connectivity with other brain regions was assessed using seed-based correlations. The stress group exhibited a strong physiological and behavioral reaction to psychosocial stress exposure. Compared with controls the stress group showed increased amygdala functional connectivity with three cortical midline structures: the posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus (p<.05, corrected), and  the medial prefrontal cortex (p<.05, small volume corrected). An hour after psychosocial stress, changes in amygdala functional connectivity were detected with cortical midline structures involved in the processing and regulation of emotions, as well as autobiographical memory. It is hypothesized that these effects could relate to top-down control of the amygdala and consolidation of self-relevant information after a stressful event. These results on functional connectivity in the recovery phase after stress might provide an important new vantage point in studying both sensitivity and resilience to stress.
21664280	20	n = 20
21681856	50	n = 50	Regions of the brain network activated by painful stimuli are also activated by nonpainful and even nonsomatosensory stimuli. We therefore analyzed where the qualitative change from nonpainful to painful perception at the pain thresholds is coded. Noxious stimuli of gaseous carbon dioxide (n = 50) were applied to the  nasal mucosa of 24 healthy volunteers at various concentrations from 10% below to 10% above the individual pain threshold. Functional magnetic resonance images showed that these trigeminal stimuli activated brain regions regarded as the "pain matrix." However, most of these activations, including the posterior insula, the primary and secondary somatosensory cortex, the amygdala, and the middle cingulate cortex, were associated with quantitative changes in stimulus intensity and did not exclusively reflect the qualitative change from nonpainful  to pain. After subtracting brain activations associated with quantitative changes in the stimuli, the qualitative change, reflecting pain-exclusive activations, could be localized mainly in the posterior insular cortex. This shows that cerebral processing of noxious stimuli focuses predominately on the quantitative  properties of stimulus intensity in both their sensory and affective dimensions,  whereas the integration of this information into the perception of pain is restricted to a small part of the pain matrix.
21718969	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: The neurobiology of bulimia nervosa (BN) is poorly understood. Recent animal literature suggests that binge eating is associated with altered brain dopamine (DA) reward function. In this study, we wanted to investigate DA-related brain reward learning in BN. METHODS: Ill BN (n = 20, age: mean = 25.2, SD = 5.3  years) and healthy control women (CW) (n = 23, age: mean = 27.2, SD = 6.4 years)  underwent functional magnetic resonance brain imaging together with application of a DA-related reward learning paradigm, the temporal difference (TD) model. That task involves association learning between conditioned visual and unconditioned taste stimuli, as well as unexpected violation of those learned associations. Study participants also completed the Sensitivity to Reward and Punishment Questionnaire. RESULTS: Bulimia nervosa individuals showed reduced brain response compared with CW for unexpected receipt and omission of taste stimuli, as well as reduced brain regression response to the TD computer model generated reward values, in insula, ventral putamen, amygdala, and orbitofrontal  cortex. Those results were qualitatively similar in BN individuals who were nondepressed and unmedicated. Binge/purge frequency in BN inversely predicted reduced TD model response. Bulimia nervosa individuals showed significantly higher Sensitivity to Reward and Punishment compared with CW. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study that relates reduced brain DA responses in BN to the altered learning of associations between arbitrary visual stimuli and taste rewards. This attenuated response is related to frequency of binge/purge episodes in BN. The brain DA neurotransmitter system could be an important treatment target for BN.
21718969	23	n = 23
21729757	19	n = 19	Adolescent offspring of schizophrenia patients (HR-S) are an important group in whom to study impaired brain function and structure, particularly of the frontal  cortices. Studies of working memory have suggested behavioral deficits and fMRI-measured hypoactivity in fronto-parietal regions in these subjects. Independent structural MRI (sMRI) studies have suggested exaggerated frontal gray matter decline. Therefore the emergent view is that fronto-parietal deficits in function and structure characterize HR-S. However, it is unknown if fronto-parietal sub-regions in which fMRI-measured hypo-activity might be observed are precisely those regions of the cortex in which gray matter deficits  are also observed. To investigate this question we conducted conjoint analyses of fronto-parietal function and structure in HR-S (n=19) and controls (n=24) with no family history of psychoses using fMRI data during a continuous working memory task (2 back), and sMRI collected in the same session. HR-S demonstrated significantly reduced BOLD activation in left dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (BA 9/46) and bilateral parietal cortex (BA 7/40). Sub-regions of interest were created from the significant fronto-parietal functional clusters. Analyses of gray matter volume from volume-modulated gray matter segments in these clusters did not reveal significant gray matter differences between groups. The results suggest that functional impairments in adolescent HR-S can be independent of impairments in structure, suggesting that the relationship between impaired function and structure is complex. Further studies will be needed to more closely assess whether impairments in function and structure provide independent or interacting pathways of vulnerability in this population.
21729757	24	n = 24
21756925	22	n = 22	The present functional magnetic resonance imaging study investigated the role of  emotion-related (e.g., amygdala) and self-related brain structures (MPFC in particular) in the processing of emotional words varying in stimulus reference. Healthy subjects (N=22) were presented with emotional (pleasant or unpleasant) or neutral words in three different conditions: (1) self (e.g., my fear), (2) other  (e.g., his fear) and (3) no reference (e.g., the fear). Processing of unpleasant  words was associated with increased amygdala and also insula activation across all conditions. Pleasant stimuli were specifically associated with increased activation of amygdala and insula when related to the self (vs. other and no reference). Activity in the MPFC (vMPFC in particular) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was preferentially increased during processing of self-related emotional words (vs. other and no reference). These results demonstrate that amygdala activation in response to emotional stimuli is modulated by stimulus reference and that brain structures implicated in emotional and self-related processing might be important for the subjective experience of one's own emotions.
21766170	13	n = 13	RATIONALE: Acute nicotine abstinence is associated with disruption of executive function and reward processes; however, the neurobiological basis of these effects has not been fully elucidated. METHODS: The effects of nicotine abstinence on brain function during reward-based probabilistic decision making were preliminarily investigated by scanning adult smokers (n = 13) following 24 h of smoking abstinence and in a smoking-satiated condition. During fMRI scanning,  participants completed the wheel of fortune task (Ernst et al. in Neuropsychologia 42:1585-1597, 2004), a decision-making task with probabilistic monetary outcomes. Brain activation was modeled during selection of options, anticipation of outcomes, and outcome feedback. RESULTS: During choice selection, reaction times were slower, and there was greater neural activation in the postcentral gyrus, insula, and frontal and parietal cortices in the abstinent condition compared to the satiated condition. During reward anticipation, greater activation was observed in the frontal pole, insula, and paracingulate cortex in  the abstinent condition compared to the satiated condition. Greater activation was also shown in the precentral gyrus and putamen in the satiated condition compared to the abstinent condition. During the outcome phase, rewards (compared  to no rewards) resulted in significant activation in the paracingulate cortex in  the satiated condition compared to the abstinent condition. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this preliminary study suggest that smoking withdrawal results in greater recruitment of insular, frontal, and parietal cortical areas during probabilistic decision making.
21778039	15	n = 15	Functional neuroimaging studies of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have focused on the neural correlates of cognitive control. However, for many youths with ADHD, emotional lability is an important clinical feature of the disorder. We aimed to identify the neural substrates associated with emotional lability that were distinct from impairments in cognitive control and to assess the effects that stimulants have on those substrates. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to assess neural activity in adolescents with (N=15) and without (N=15) ADHD while they performed cognitive and emotional versions of the  Stroop task that engage cognitive control and emotional processing, respectively. The participants with ADHD were scanned both on and off stimulant medication in a counterbalanced fashion. Controlling for differences in cognitive control, we found that during the emotional Stroop task, adolescents with ADHD as compared with controls demonstrated atypical activity in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Stimulants attenuated activity in the mPFC to levels comparable with controls.
21778039	15	n = 15
21813680	22	n = 22	Brain beta-amyloid (Abeta) deposition during normal aging is highlighted as an initial pathogenetic event in the development of Alzheimer's disease. Many recent brain imaging studies have focused on areas deactivated during cognitive tasks [the default mode network (DMN), i.e., medial frontal gyrus/anterior cingulate cortex and precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex], where the strength of functional coordination was more or less affected by cerebral Abeta deposits. In  the present positron emission tomography study, to investigate whether regional glucose metabolic alterations and Abeta deposits seen in nondemented elderly human subjects (n = 22) are of pathophysiological importance in changes of brain  hemodynamic coordination in DMN during normal aging, we measured cerebral glucose metabolism with [(18)F]FDG, Abeta deposits with [(11)C]PIB, and regional cerebral blood flow during control and working memory tasks by H(2)(15)O on the same day.  Data were analyzed using both region of interest and statistical parametric mapping. Our results indicated that the amount of Abeta deposits was negatively correlated with hemodynamic similarity between medial frontal and medial posterior regions, and the lower similarity was associated with poorer working memory performance. In contrast, brain glucose metabolism was not related to this medial hemodynamic similarity. These findings suggest that traceable Abeta deposition, but not glucose hypometabolism, in the brain plays an important role  in occurrence of neuronal discoordination in DMN along with poor working memory in healthy elderly people.
21831358	18	n = 18	BACKGROUND: Referential delusions are the most common symptom of schizophrenia and offer an opportunity to examine the neural correlates of delusions because they occur in discrete episodes that can be studied in the scanner. The cortical  midline structures (CMS) and subcortical regions, including the amygdala and striatum, are linked with self-reference in healthy adults. Less is known about the neural substrates of altered self-reference in schizophrenia. METHODS: In this study, patients with schizophrenia experiencing prominent referential delusions (n = 18) and healthy control subjects (n = 17) were presented with ambiguous sentences while in the magnetic resonance imaging scanner and asked to  rate whether they felt the sentences had been written specifically about them. The sentences were either generic (nonpersonalized) or individually tailored personalized sentences, designed to induce referential ideation. We hypothesized  that both groups would show activity in the CMS, limbic, and striatal regions and that induced referential ideation would be associated with greater activity in striatal areas in patients with schizophrenia. RESULTS: A robust main effect of endorsement (endorsed vs. nonendorsed) was observed in the CMS, as well as subcortical regions, including the nucleus accumbens/ventral striatum, amygdala,  insula, and midbrain dopamine regions. A group-by-endorsement interaction was seen in the medial prefrontal cortex, insula and nucleus accumbens/ventral striatum. Activity in insula and ventral striatum also correlated with the strength of the delusions of reference. CONCLUSIONS: Referential ideation in persons with delusions is associated with heightened CMS, limbic and striatal activity and reduced differentiation between self- and non-self-relevant information.
21831358	17	n = 17
21839174	13	n = 13	Previous brain imaging work suggests that stroke alters the effective connectivity (the influence neural regions exert upon each other) of motor execution networks. The present study examines the intrinsic effective connectivity of top-down motor control in stroke survivors (n=13) relative to healthy participants (n=12). Stroke survivors exhibited significant deficits in motor function, as assessed by the Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment. We used structural equation modeling (SEM) of resting-state fMRI data to investigate the  relationship between motor deficits and the intrinsic effective connectivity between brain regions involved in motor control and motor execution. An exploratory adaptation of SEM determined the optimal model of motor execution effective connectivity in healthy participants, and confirmatory SEM assessed stroke survivors' fit to that model. We observed alterations in spontaneous resting-state effective connectivity from fronto-parietal guidance systems to the motor network in stroke survivors. More specifically, diminished connectivity was found in connections from the superior parietal cortex to primary motor cortex and supplementary motor cortex. Furthermore, the paths demonstrated large individual variance in stroke survivors but less variance in healthy participants. These findings suggest that characterizing the deficits in resting-state connectivity of top-down processes in stroke survivors may help optimize cognitive and physical rehabilitation therapies by individually targeting specific neural pathway.
21839174	12	n = 12
21842406	138	n = 138	Structural neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that all regions of the cortex  are not affected equally by aging, with frontal regions appearing especially susceptible to atrophy. The "last in, first out" hypothesis posits that aging is, in a sense, the inverse of development: late-maturing regions of the brain are preferentially vulnerable to age-related loss of structural integrity. We tested  this hypothesis by analyzing age-related changes in regional cortical thickness via three methods: (1) an exploratory linear regression of cortical thickness and age across the entire cortical mantle (2) an analysis of age-related differences  in the thickness of zones of cortex defined by functional/cytoarchitectural affiliation (including primary sensory/motor, unimodal association, heteromodal association, and paralimbic zones), and (3) an analysis of age-related differences in the thickness of regions of cortex defined by surface area expansion in the period between birth and early adulthood. Subjects were grouped  as young (aged 18-29, n = 138), middle-aged (aged 30-59, n = 80), young-old (aged 60-79, n = 60), and old-old (aged 80+, n = 38). Thinning of the cortex between young and middle-aged adults was greatest in heteromodal association cortex and regions of high postnatal surface area expansion. In contrast, thinning in old-old age was greatest in primary sensory/motor cortices and regions of low postnatal surface area expansion. In sum, these results lead us to propose a sequential "developmental-sensory" model of aging, in which developmental factors influence cortical vulnerability relatively early in the aging process, whereas later-in more advanced stages of aging-factors specific to primary sensory and motor cortices confer vulnerability. This model offers explicitly testable hypotheses and suggests the possibility that normal aging may potentially allow for multiple opportunities for intervention to promote the structural integrity of the cerebral cortex.
21842406	80	n = 80
21842406	60	n = 60
21842406	38	n = 38
21843538	11	n = 11	There is increasing interest in understanding the roles of distorted beliefs about the self, ostensibly unrelated to eating, weight and shape, in eating disorders (EDs), but little is known about their neural correlates. We therefore  used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate the neural correlates of self-referent emotional processing in EDs. During the scan, unmedicated patients with bulimia nervosa (n=11) and healthy controls (n=16) responded to personality words previously found to be related to negative self beliefs in EDs  and depression. Rating of the negative personality descriptors resulted in reduced activation in patients compared to controls in parietal, occipital and limbic areas including the amygdala. There was no evidence that reduced activity  in patients was secondary to increased cognitive control. Different patterns of neural activation between patients and controls may be the result of either habituation to personally relevant negative self beliefs or of emotional blunting in patients.
21843538	16	n = 16
21878364	29	n = 29	The hopelessness theory (HT) of depression is a diathesis-stress theory which construes cognitive vulnerability (CV) to depression. Neuroimaging studies examining depression have implicated the amygdala as an important potential locus of dysfunction in the processing of salient threatening stimuli. However, little  is known about neural activation in the brain of subjects with CV to depression.  Medication-free major depressive disorder (MDD) subjects (N=29), never depressed  subjects with CV (N=26), and demographically matched never depressed healthy control (HC) subjects (N=31) were scanned using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing an emotional matching task. The MDD subjects showed elevated left amygdala responses and reduced left dorsolateral prefrontal  cortex (dlPFC) activation levels relative to HC subjects. Similarly, CV subjects  had greater activity in the amygdala bilaterally and lesser activation in the dlPFC bilaterally, relative to HC subjects. The present findings raise the possibility that cognitive vulnerability to depression might be characterized by  hypoactivation of the prefrontal cortex and hyperactivation of the amygdala in response to emotional stimuli; our observations might provide a potential interpretation to explain the abnormalities in neural networks mediating cognitive modulation of emotions in individuals with cognitive vulnerability to depression.
21878364	26	n = 26
21878364	31	n = 31
21886614	100	n = 100	The brain is a vastly interconnected organ and methods are needed to investigate  its long range structure(S)-function(F) associations to better understand disorders such as schizophrenia that are hypothesized to be due to distributed disconnected brain regions. In previous work we introduced a methodology to reduce the whole brain S-F correlations to a histogram and here we reduce the correlations to brain clusters. The application of our approach to sMRI [gray matter (GM) concentration maps] and functional magnetic resonance imaging data (general linear model activation maps during Encode and Probe epochs of a working memory task) from patients with schizophrenia (SZ, n = 100) and healthy controls  (HC, n = 100) presented the following results. In HC the whole brain correlation  histograms for GM-Encode and GM-Probe overlap for Low and Medium loads and at High the histograms separate, but in SZ the histograms do not overlap for any of  the load levels and Medium load shows the maximum difference. We computed GM-F differential correlation clusters using activation for Probe Medium, and they included regions in the left and right superior temporal gyri, anterior cingulate, cuneus, middle temporal gyrus, and the cerebellum. Inter-cluster GM-Probe correlations for Medium load were positive in HC but negative in SZ. Within group inter-cluster GM-Encode and GM-Probe correlation comparisons show no differences in HC but in SZ differences are evident in the same clusters where HC vs. SZ differences occurred for Probe Medium, indicating that the S-F integrity during Probe is aberrant in SZ. Through a data-driven whole brain analysis approach we find novel brain clusters and show how the S-F differential correlation changes during Probe and Encode at three memory load levels. Structural and functional anomalies have been extensively reported in schizophrenia and here we provide evidences to suggest that evaluating S-F associations can provide important additional information.
21886614	100	n = 100
21888982	10	n = 10	Whether people with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) have a specific deficit when processing biological motion has been a topic of much debate. We used psychophysical methods to determine individual behavioural thresholds in a point-light direction discrimination paradigm for a small but carefully matched groups of adults (N=10 per group) with and without ASDs. These thresholds were used to derive individual stimulus levels in an identical fMRI task, with the purpose of equalising task performance across all participants whilst inside the  scanner. The results of this investigation show that despite comparable behavioural performance both inside and outside the scanner, the group with ASDs  shows a different pattern of BOLD activation from the TD group in response to the same stimulus levels. Furthermore, connectivity analysis suggests that the main differences between the groups are that the TD group utilise a unitary network with information passing from temporal to parietal regions, whilst the ASD group  utilise two distinct networks; one utilising motion sensitive areas and another utilising form selective areas. Furthermore, a temporal-parietal link that is present in the TD group is missing in the ASD group. We tentatively propose that  these differences may occur due to early dysfunctional connectivity in the brains of people with ASDs, which to some extent is compensated for by rewiring in high  functioning adults.
21896334	38	n = 38	Several studies on structural MRI in children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have mainly focused on samples prevailingly consisting of males. Sex differences in brain structure are observable since infancy and therefore caution is required in transferring to females the results obtained for males. The neuroanatomical phenotype of female children with ASD (ASDf) represents indeed a  neglected area of research. In this study, we investigated for the first time the anatomic brain structures of a sample entirely composed of ASDf (n=38; 2-7 years  of age; mean=53 months; SD=18) with respect to 38 female age and non verbal IQ matched controls, using both mass-univariate and pattern classification approaches. The whole brain volumes of each group were compared using voxel-based morphometry (VBM) with diffeomorphic anatomical registration through exponentiated lie algebra (DARTEL) procedure, allowing us to build a study-specific template. Significantly more gray matter (GM) was found in the left superior frontal gyrus (SFG) in ASDf subjects compared to controls. The GM segments obtained in the VBM-DARTEL preprocessing are also classified with a support vector machine (SVM), using the leave-pair-out cross-validation protocol. Then, the recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE) approach allows for the identification of the most discriminating voxels in the GM segments and these prove extremely consistent with the SFG region identified by the VBM analysis. Furthermore, the SVM-RFE map obtained with the most discriminating set of voxels  corresponding to the maximum Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC(max)=0.80) highlighted a more complex circuitry of increased cortical  volume in ASDf, involving bilaterally the SFG and the right temporo-parietal junction (TPJ). The SFG and TPJ abnormalities may be relevant to the pathophysiology of ASDf, since these structures participate in some core atypical features of autism.
21906686	35	n = 35	Research on the cortical sources of nociceptive laser-evoked brain potentials (LEPs) began almost two decades ago (Tarkka and Treede, 1993). Whereas there is a large consensus on the sources of the late part of the LEP waveform (N2 and P2 waves), the relative contribution of the primary somatosensory cortex (S1) to the early part of the LEP waveform (N1 wave) is still debated. To address this issue  we recorded LEPs elicited by the stimulation of four limbs in a large population  (n=35). Early LEP generators were estimated both at single-subject and group level, using three different approaches: distributed source analysis, dipolar source modeling, and probabilistic independent component analysis (ICA). We show  that the scalp distribution of the earliest LEP response to hand stimulation was  maximal over the central-parietal electrodes contralateral to the stimulated side, while that of the earliest LEP response to foot stimulation was maximal over the central-parietal midline electrodes. Crucially, all three approaches indicated hand and foot S1 areas as generators of the earliest LEP response. Altogether, these findings indicate that the earliest part of the scalp response  elicited by a selective nociceptive stimulus is largely explained by activity in  the contralateral S1, with negligible contribution from the secondary somatosensory cortex (S2).
21908871	14	n = 14	Voice processing in neurodegenerative disease is poorly understood. Here we undertook a systematic investigation of voice processing in a cohort of patients  with clinical diagnoses representing two canonical dementia syndromes: temporal variant frontotemporal lobar degeneration (n = 14) and Alzheimer's disease (n = 22). Patient performance was compared with a healthy matched control group (n = 35). All subjects had a comprehensive neuropsychological assessment including measures of voice perception (vocal size, gender, speaker discrimination) and voice recognition (familiarity, identification, naming and cross-modal matching)  and equivalent measures of face and name processing. Neuroanatomical associations of voice processing performance were assessed using voxel-based morphometry. Both disease groups showed deficits on all aspects of voice recognition and impairment was more severe in the temporal variant frontotemporal lobar degeneration group than the Alzheimer's disease group. Face and name recognition were also impaired  in both disease groups and name recognition was significantly more impaired than  other modalities in the temporal variant frontotemporal lobar degeneration group. The Alzheimer's disease group showed additional deficits of vocal gender perception and voice discrimination. The neuroanatomical analysis across both disease groups revealed common grey matter associations of familiarity, identification and cross-modal recognition in all modalities in the right temporal pole and anterior fusiform gyrus; while in the Alzheimer's disease group, voice discrimination was associated with grey matter in the right inferior parietal lobe. The findings suggest that impairments of voice recognition are significant in both these canonical dementia syndromes but particularly severe in temporal variant frontotemporal lobar degeneration, whereas impairments of voice  perception may show relative specificity for Alzheimer's disease. The right anterior temporal lobe is likely to have a critical role in the recognition of voices and other modalities of person knowledge.
21908871	22	n = 22
21908871	35	n = 35
21922599	21	n = 21	OBJECTIVES: Neurofunctional alterations are correlates of vulnerability to psychosis, as well as of the disorder itself. How these abnormalities relate to different probabilities for later transition to psychosis is unclear. We investigated vulnerability- versus disease-related versus resilience biomarkers of psychosis during working memory (WM) processing in individuals with an at-risk mental state (ARMS). EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients with "first-episode psychosis" (FEP, n = 21), short-term ARMS (ARMS-ST, n = 17), long-term ARMS (ARMS-LT, n = 16), and healthy controls (HC, n = 20) were investigated with an n-back WM task.  We examined functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and structural magnetic  resonance imaging (sMRI) data in conjunction using biological parametric mapping  (BPM) toolbox. PRINCIPAL OBSERVATIONS: There were no differences in accuracy, but the FEP and the ARMS-ST group had longer reaction times compared with the HC and  the ARMS-LT group. With the 2-back > 0-back contrast, we found reduced functional activation in ARMS-ST and FEP compared with the HC group in parietal and middle frontal regions. Relative to ARMS-LT individuals, FEP patients showed decreased activation in the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus and insula, and in the left prefrontal cortex. Compared with the ARMS-LT, the ARMS-ST subjects showed reduced activation in the right inferior frontal gyrus and insula. Reduced insular and prefrontal activation was associated with gray matter volume reduction in the same area in the ARMS-LT group. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that vulnerability to psychosis was associated with neurofunctional alterations in fronto-temporo-parietal networks in a WM task. Neurofunctional differences within the ARMS were related to different duration of the prodromal state and resilience factors.
21922599	17	n = 17
21922599	16	n = 16
21922599	20	n = 20
21932266	16	n = 16	There has been much debate recently over the functional role played by the planum temporale (PT) within the context of the dorsal auditory processing stream. Some  studies indicate that regions in the PT support spatial hearing and other auditory functions, whereas others demonstrate sensory-motor response properties. This multifunctionality has led to the claim that the PT is performing a common computational pattern matching operation, then routing the signals (spatial, object, sensory-motor) into an appropriate processing stream. An alternative possibility is that the PT is functionally subdivided with separate regions supporting various functions. We assess this possibility using a within subject fMRI block design. DTI data were also collected to examine connectivity. There were four auditory conditions: stationary noise, moving noise, listening to pseudowords, and shadowing pseudowords (covert repetition). Contrasting the shadow and listen conditions should activate regions specific to sensory-motor processes, while contrasting the stationary and moving noise conditions should activate regions involved in spatial hearing. Subjects (N = 16) showed greater activation for shadowing in left posterior PT, area Spt, when the shadow and listen conditions were contrasted. The motion vs. stationary noise contrast revealed greater activation in a more medial and anterior portion of left PT. Seeds from these two contrasts were then used to guide the DTI analysis in an examination of connectivity via streamline tractography, which revealed different patterns of connectivity. Findings support a heterogeneous model of the PT, with  functionally distinct regions for sensory-motor integration and processes involved in auditory spatial perception.
21935394	26	n = 26	BACKGROUND: Deficits of the default mode network (DMN) have been demonstrated in  subjects with amnestic type mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) who have a high risk of developing Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, no longitudinal study of this network has been reported in aMCI. Identifying links between development of DMN and aMCI progression would be of considerable value in understanding brain changes underpinning aMCI and determining risk of conversion to AD. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Resting-state fMRI was acquired in aMCI subjects  (n = 26) and controls (n = 18) at baseline and after approximately 20 months follow up. Independent component analysis was used to isolate the DMN in each participant. Differences in DMN between aMCI and controls were examined at baseline, and subsequent changes between baseline and follow-up were also assessed in the groups. Posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus (PCC/PCu) hyper-functional connectivity was observed at baseline in aMCI subjects, while a  substantial decrement of these connections was evident at follow-up in aMCI subjects, compared to matched controls. Specifically, PCC/PCu dysfunction was positively related to the impairments of episodic memory from baseline to follow  up in aMCI group. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The patterns of longitudinal deficits of DMN may assist investigators to identify and monitor the development of aMCI.
21935394	18	n = 18
21937201	12	n = 12	Only a few studies have investigated the neural substrate of response inhibition  in adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) using Stop-Signal and Go/No-Go tasks. Inconsistencies and methodological limitations in the existing literature have resulted in limited conclusions regarding underlying pathophysiology. We examined the neural basis of response inhibition in a group of adults diagnosed with ADHD in childhood and who continue to meet criteria for  ADHD. Adults with ADHD (n=12) and controls (n=12) were recruited from an ongoing  longitudinal study and were matched for age, IQ, and education. Individuals with  comorbid conditions were excluded. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to identify and compare the brain activation patterns during correct trials of a response-inhibition task (Go/No-Go). Our results showed that the control group recruited a more extensive network of brain regions than the ADHD group during correct inhibition trials. Adults with ADHD showed reduced brain activation in the right frontal eye field, pre-supplementary motor area, left precentral gyrus, and the inferior parietal lobe bilaterally. During successful inhibition of an inappropriate response, adults with ADHD display reduced activation in fronto-parietal networks previously implicated in working memory, goal-oriented attention, and response selection. This profile of brain activation may be specifically associated with ADHD in adulthood.
21937201	12	n = 12
21967987	18	n = 18	BACKGROUND: Compulsivity is a hallmark of drug addiction and in animal models is  measured by consecutive incorrect responses to a previously rewarded stimulus during reversal learning. The aim of this study was to measure behavioral and neural markers of compulsivity in stimulant-dependent individuals and to test whether these markers could be modulated by treatment with drugs targeting the dopamine system. METHODS: In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design, stimulant-dependent individuals (SDIs; n = 18) and healthy volunteers (n = 18) received single doses of dopamine D(2/3) receptor antagonist  (amisulpride, 400 mg) and agonist (pramipexole, 0.5 mg) drugs. To examine compulsivity and its dopaminergic modulation more generally, patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD; n = 18) were also included in the study. RESULTS: SDIs made significantly more perseverative responses to the previously correct stimulus immediately following reversal, compared with both healthy volunteers and patients with OCD. Across all participants, the number of perseverative errors was negatively correlated with functional activation in right fronto-striato-parietal networks-in particular, the right caudate nucleus.  In SDIs, perseveration-related caudate activation was abnormally reduced in the placebo condition, but the dopamine D(2/3) agonist pramipexole normalized both perseverative responding and related activation of the right caudate. CONCLUSIONS: Perseveration during reversal learning was associated specifically with stimulant dependence rather than with compulsive behaviors more generally. The beneficial effects of a dopamine agonist drug challenge on both behavior and  associated brain activation in SDIs may indicate new avenues for pharmacologic treatment in stimulant dependence.
21967987	18	n = 18
21967987	18	n = 18
21976513	18	n = 18	We assess the relationship of age-related losses in striatal D1 receptor densities to age-related reductions in functional connectivity between spatially  distinct cortical regions in healthy human participants. Previous neuroimaging studies have reported age-related differences in functional connectivity of the frontoparietal working memory network and the default mode network during task performance. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging and seed-based connectivity (right dorsolateral and medial prefrontal cortex) to extend these findings: Anterior-posterior connectivity of both these functional networks was reduced in older (65-75 years, n = 18) compared with younger (20-30 years, n = 19) adults, whereas bilateral connectivity in prefrontal cortex was increased in  older adults. Positron emission tomography with the D1 receptor ligand [(11)C]SCH23390 was used to assess caudate D1 receptor density in the same sample. Older adults showed significantly reduced caudate D1 receptor density compared to the younger adults. Of key interest, partial correlations showed that individual differences in caudate D1 receptor density were positively associated  with individual differences in dorsolateral prefrontal connectivity to right parietal cortex (BA40) and negatively with medial prefrontal connectivity to right parietal cortex (BA40 and postcentral gyrus), after controlling for age. We found no correlation of caudate D1 receptor density with anterior-posterior coupling within the default mode network or with bilateral frontal connectivity.  These results are consistent with animal work that has identified a role for caudate D1 receptors in mediating information transfer between prefrontal areas and parietal cortex.
21976513	19	n = 19
21982930	188	n = 188	Sensation seeking has been linked to increased risk taking and is therefore crucial in influencing behavioral outcomes of risk-taking behavior. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the neural underpinnings of risk appraisal were studied in a large subject sample (n=188), stratified according to thrill and adventure seeking (TAS) ratings. As defined by a median split of the sample, low and high TAS groups were compared on a simple decision-making task completed during fMRI. The task was designed such that risk (i.e., magnitude of outcome) and gains (i.e., direction of outcome) could be mapped independently. Behavioral analysis indicated that high TAS individuals are more sensitive to rewards but less discriminating between risk with and without punishment and that low TAS individuals are less sensitive to rewards but quite sensitive to receiving punishments in risky situations. Imaging results on the group differences for the interaction between level of risk and level of gain showed differences in the right superior frontal gyrus (BA6), left insula (BA21), right  nucleus accumbens, left lentiform nucleus, and left precuneus (BA7). The presented data suggest a neural model of risk processing in sensation seeking individuals such that the positive response to reward outweighs the impact of equivalent loss. This imbalance in approach/avoidance is evident in differences in the underlying neural substrates in TAS individuals and leads to greater risk  behavior in the face of potential loss.
21989805	17	n = 17	BACKGROUND: Among nicotine-dependent smokers, smoking abstinence disrupts multiple cognitive and affective processes including conflict resolution and emotional information processing (EIP). However, the neurobiological basis of abstinence effects on resolving emotional interference on cognition remains largely uncharacterized. In this study, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to investigate smoking abstinence effects on emotion-cognition interactions. METHODS: Smokers (n = 17) underwent fMRI while performing an affective Stroop task (aST) over two sessions: once following 24-h abstinence and once following smoking as usual. The aST includes trials that serially present incongruent or congruent numerical grids bracketed by neutral or negative emotional distractors and view-only emotional image trials. Statistical analyses  were conducted using a statistical threshold of p < 0.05 cluster corrected. RESULTS: Smoking abstinence increased Stroop blood-oxygenation-level-dependent response in the right middle frontal and rostral anterior cingulate gyri. Moreover, withdrawal-induced negative affect was associated with less activation  in frontoparietal regions during negative emotional information processing; whereas, during Stroop trials, negative affect predicted greater activation in frontal regions during negative, but not neutral emotional distractor trials. CONCLUSION: Hyperactivation in the frontal executive control network during smoking abstinence may represent a need to recruit additional executive resources to meet task demands. Moreover, abstinence-induced negative affect may disrupt cognitive control neural circuitry during EIP and place additional demands on frontal executive neural resources during cognitive demands when presented with emotionally distracting stimuli.
21993055	12	n = 12	Functional brain imaging in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) reveals differences in activation of task-relevant brain areas between patients and age-matched healthy controls. However, some studies reported hyperactivation and others hypoactivation in MCI compared with controls. The inconsistencies may be explained by compensatory mechanisms due to high complexity of the applied tasks. The oddball task is a simple paradigm that is known to activate a widespread network in the brain, involving attentional and monitoring mechanisms. In the present study, we examined amnestic or amnestic multidomain MCI patients (n = 12) and healthy controls (n = 13) in an auditory oddball task. Participants had to respond to infrequent targets and inhibit response to infrequent novel-nontarget  stimuli. Lower stimulus related activation was found in MCI patients compared with healthy controls in parts of the middle temporal gyrus, the temporal pole, regions along the superior temporal sulcus, in the left cuneus, the left supramarginal gyrus, the anterior cingulated cortex and in the left inferior and  middle frontal gyrus. Activation for oddball stimuli is assumed to reflect an automatic reflexive engagement of many brain regions in response to potentially important changes in the environment as well as cognitive control to monitor responses. The mechanisms of attention and cognitive control may be severely impaired in MCI and thus, underlie the cognitive deficits of this clinical group.
21993055	13	n = 13
22004983	22	n = 22	OBJECTIVE: The aim of the current study was to determine the influence of implicated affective circuitry disturbance in pediatric bipolar disorder (PBD) on behavioral inhibition. The differential influence of an antipsychotic and an anti-epileptic medication on the functional connectivity across affective and cognitive neural operations in PBD was examined. METHODS: This was a six-week double blind randomized fMRI trial of risperidone plus placebo vs. divalproex plus placebo for patients with mania (n=22; 13.6 +/- 2.5 years). Healthy controls (HC; n=14, 14.5 +/- 2.8 years) were also scanned for normative comparison. Participants performed a response inhibition fMRI task where a motor response, already 'on the way' to execution, had to be voluntarily inhibited on trials where a stop signal was presented. Independent component analysis was used to map functional connectivity across the whole brain. RESULTS: While there were no behavioral differences between the groups at pre- or post-drug trial, there was significant improvement on manic symptoms in the patient groups. All participants engaged an evaluative affective circuit (EAC: bilateral inferior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), middle temporal gyrus, insulae, caudate and putamen) and a reactive affective circuit (RAC: bilateral occipital cortex, amygdala, medial frontal gyrus and insula) during task performance. Within the EAC, post-treatment and relative to HC, greater engagement was seen in left insula in risperidone group and left subgenual ACC in divalproex group. Within the RAC, greater baseline amygdala connectivity in patients did not alter with treatment. CONCLUSION: EAC and RAC are two key circuits that moderate emotional influence on response inhibition in PBD. Risperidone and divalproex differentially engage the EAC. Limited change in amygdala activity with treatment in all patients indicates a likely trait deficit in PBD.
22004983	14	n = 14
22032950	10	n = 10	A fundamental component of brain development is the formation of large-scale networks across the cortex. One such network, the default network, undergoes a protracted development, displaying weak connectivity in childhood that strengthens in adolescence and becomes most robust in adulthood. Little is known  about the genetic contributions to default network connectivity in adulthood or during development. Alterations in connectivity between posterior and frontal portions of the default network have been associated with several psychological disorders, including anxiety, autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, depression, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. These disorders have also been linked to variants of the serotonin transporter linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR). The LA allele of 5-HTTLPR results in higher serotonin transporter expression than the S allele or the rarer LG allele. 5-HTTLPR may influence default network connectivity, as the superior medial frontal region has been shown to be sensitive to changes in serotonin. Also, serotonin as a growth factor early in development may alter large-scale networks such as the default network. The present study examined the influence of 5-HTTLPR variants on connectivity between the posterior and frontal structures and its development in  a cross-sectional study of 39 healthy children and adolescents. We found that children and adolescents homozygous for the S allele (S/S, n=10) showed weaker connectivity in the superior medial frontal cortex compared to those homozygous for the LA allele (LA/LA, n=13) or heterozygotes (S/LA, S/LG, n=16). Moreover, there was an age-by-genotype interaction, such that those with LA/LA genotype had the steepest age-related increase in connectivity between the posterior hub and superior medial frontal cortex, followed by heterozygotes. In contrast, individuals with the S/S genotype had the least age-related increase in connectivity strength. This preliminary report expands our understanding of the genetic influences on the development of large-scale brain connectivity and lays  down the foundation for future research and replication of the results with a larger sample.
22032950	13	n = 13
22032950	16	n = 16
22044475	27	n = 27	Risk aversion is associated with several important real world outcomes. Although  the neurobiological correlates of risk aversion have been studied in young persons, little is known of the neurobiological correlates of risk aversion among older persons. Resting-state functional MRI data were collected on 134 non-demented participants of the Rush Memory and Aging Project, a community-based cohort study of aging. Risk aversion was measured using a series of standard questions in which participants were asked to choose between a certain monetary payment ($15) versus a gamble in which they could gain more than $15 or gain nothing, with potential gains varied across questions. Participants determined to be "high" (n=27) and "low" (n=27) in risk aversion were grouped accordingly. Using a spherical seed region of interest in the anterior cingulate cortex, voxel-wise functional connectivity network similarities were observed in bilateral frontal, anterior and posterior cingulate, insula, basal ganglia, temporal, parietal, and thalamic regions. Differences in functional connectivity  were observed such that those low in risk aversion had greater connectivity to clusters in the superior, middle, and medial frontal regions, as well as cerebellar, parietal, occipital, and inferior temporal regions. Those high in risk aversion had greater connectivity to clusters in the inferior and orbital frontal, parahippocampal, and insula regions, as well as thalamic, parietal, precentral gyrus, postcentral gyrus, and middle temporal regions. Similarities and differences in functional connectivity patterns may reflect the historical recruitment of specific brain regions as a network in the active processing of risk in older adults.
22044475	27	n = 27
22073183	11	n = 11	In the management of clinical low back pain (LBP), actual damage to lower back areas such as muscles, intervertebral discs etc. are normally targeted for therapy. However, LBP may involve not only sensory pain, but also underlying affective pain which may also play an important role overall in painful events. Therefore we hypothesized that visualization of a painful event may trigger painful memories, thus provoking the affective dimension of pain. The present study investigated neural correlates of affect processing in subjects with LBP (n = 11) and subjects without LBP (n = 11) through the use of virtual LBP stimuli. Whole brain functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for all subjects while they were shown a picture of a man carrying luggage in a half-crouching position. All subjects with LBP reported experiencing discomfort and 7 LBP subjects reported experiencing pain. In contrast to subjects without LBP, subjects with LBP displayed activation of the cortical area related to pain  and emotions: the insula, supplementary motor area, premotor area, thalamus, pulvinar, posterior cingulate cortex, hippocampus, fusiform, gyrus, and cerebellum. These results suggest that the virtual LBP stimuli caused memory retrieval of unpleasant experiences and therefore may be associated with prolonged chronic LBP conditions.
22073183	11	n = 11
22079662	25	n = 25	White matter abnormalities have been repeatedly reported in both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (BD) in diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) studies, but the empirical evidence about the diagnostic specificity of white matter abnormalities in these disorders is still limited. This study sought to investigate the alterations in fractional anisotropy (FA) in white matter throughout the entire brain of patients from Chengdu, China with paranoid schizophrenia and bipolar mania. For this purpose, DTI was used to assess white matter integrity in patients with paranoid schizophrenia (n=25) and psychotic bipolar mania (n=18) who had been treated with standard pharmacotherapy for fewer than 5 days at the time of study, as well as in normal controls (n=30). The differences in FA were measured by use of voxel-based analysis. The results show that reduced FA was found in the left posterior corona radiata (PCR) in patients with psychotic bipolar mania and paranoid schizophrenia compared to the controls. Patients with  psychotic bipolar mania also showed a significant reduction in FA in right posterior corona radiata and in right anterior thalamic radiation (ATR). A direct comparison between the two patient groups found no significant differences in any regions, and none of the findings were associated with illness duration. Correlation analysis indicated that FA values showed a significant negative correlation with positive symptom scores on the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale in the left frontal-parietal lobe in the paranoid schizophrenia. It was concluded that common abnormalities in the left PCR might imply an overlap in white matter pathology in the two disorders and might be related to shared risk factors for the two disorders.
22079662	18	n = 18
22079662	30	n = 30
22101493	14	n = 14	Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), we examined the role of periodontal afferent inputs on cerebral activation pattern evoked by masticatory muscle activity in twenty-two subjects.  Statistical comparisons were used to identify brain regions with significant activation after subtraction of baseline activity from sham teeth-tapping (no periodontal input) and teeth-tapping (periodontal input) activity in an fMRI (N = 14) and NIRS study (N = 8). Both sham teeth-tapping and teeth-tapping significantly activated bilateral sensorimotor cortex and supplementary motor area in the fMRI study. NIRS revealed that oxygenated hemoglobin concentrations increased in sensorimotor cortex; however, there was no significant difference in degree of oxygenated hemoglobin changes between sham teeth-tapping and teeth-tapping. A control study (N = 8) characterized the jaw muscle activity and  amplitude of the two motor tasks and demonstrated significantly higher electromyogram (EMG) activity in the jaw closing muscles during teeth contact in  the teeth-tapping session. Since the cerebral activation during sham teeth-tapping and teeth-tapping was similar, we suggest that the influence of periodontal afferent inputs and associated jaw muscle activity is relatively minor compared to the rhythmic jaw movements. Although the clinical significance  of the present findings remains unknown, they may have implications for the understanding of awake or sleep-related bruxism characterized by subconscious and rhythmic teeth-grinding or teeth-clenching.
22101493	8	n = 8
22101493	8	n = 8
22109998	17	n = 17	A central topic in sensorimotor neuroscience is the static-dynamic dichotomy that exists throughout the nervous system. Previous work examining motor unit synchronization reports that the activation strategy and timing of motor units differ for static and dynamic tasks. However, it remains unclear whether segregated or overlapping blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) activity exists in  the brain for static and dynamic motor control. This study compared the neural circuits associated with the production of static force to those associated with  the production of dynamic force pulses. To that end, healthy young adults (n = 17) completed static and dynamic precision grip force tasks during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Both tasks activated core regions within the visuomotor network, including primary and sensory motor cortices, premotor cortices, multiple visual areas, putamen, and cerebellum. Static force was associated with unique activity in a right-lateralized cortical network including inferior parietal lobe, ventral premotor cortex, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. In contrast, dynamic force was associated with unique activity in left-lateralized and midline cortical regions, including supplementary motor area, superior parietal lobe, fusiform gyrus, and visual area V3. These findings  provide the first neuroimaging evidence supporting a lateralized pattern of brain activity for the production of static and dynamic precision grip force.
22114078	47	n = 47	An emerging body of research suggests that mindfulness-based interventions may be beneficial for smoking cessation and the treatment of other addictive disorders.  One way that mindfulness may facilitate smoking cessation is through the reduction of craving to smoking cues. The present work considers whether mindful  attention can reduce self-reported and neural markers of cue-induced craving in treatment seeking smokers. Forty-seven (n = 47) meditation-naive treatment-seeking smokers (12-h abstinent from smoking) viewed and made ratings of smoking and neutral images while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants were trained and instructed to view these images passively or with mindful attention. Results indicated that mindful attention reduced self-reported craving to smoking images, and reduced neural activity in a craving-related region of subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (sgACC). Moreover,  a psychophysiological interaction analysis revealed that mindful attention reduced functional connectivity between sgACC and other craving-related regions compared to passively viewing smoking images, suggesting that mindfulness may decouple craving neurocircuitry when viewing smoking cues. These results provide  an initial indication that mindful attention may describe a 'bottom-up' attention to one's present moment experience in ways that can help reduce subjective and neural reactivity to smoking cues in smokers.
22136749	36	n = 36	This functional magnetic resonance imaging study analysed the behavioural and neural responses during expectation-mediated placebo analgesia in a rectal pain model in healthy subjects. In N=36 healthy subjects, the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) response during cued anticipation and painful rectal stimulation was measured. Using a within-subject design, placebo analgesia was induced by changing expectations regarding the probability of receiving an analgesic drug to 0%, 50%, and 100%. Placebo responders were identified by median split based on pain reduction (0% to 100% conditions), and changes in neural activation correlating with pain reduction in the 0% and 100% conditions were assessed in a regions-of-interest analysis. Expectation of pain relief resulted in overall reductions in pain and urge to defecate, and this response was significantly more pronounced in responders. Within responders, pain reduction correlated with reduced activation of dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices, somatosensory cortex, and thalamus during cued anticipation (paired t tests on the contrast 0%>100%); during painful stimulation, pain reduction correlated with reduced activation of the thalamus. Compared with nonresponders,  responders demonstrated greater placebo-induced decreases in activation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during anticipation and in somatosensory cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and thalamus during pain. In conclusion, the expectation of pain relief can substantially change perceived painfulness of visceral stimuli, which is associated with activity changes in the thalamus, prefrontal, and somatosensory cortices. Placebo analgesia constitutes a paradigm  to elucidate psychological components of the pain response relevant to the pathophysiology and treatment of chronic abdominal pain.
22155028	190	n = 190	During development from childhood to adulthood the human brain undergoes considerable thinning of the cerebral cortex. Whether developmental cortical thinning is influenced by genes and if independent genetic factors influence different parts of the cortex is not known. Magnetic resonance brain imaging was  done in twins at age 9 (N = 190) and again at age 12 (N = 125; 113 repeated measures) to assess genetic influences on changes in cortical thinning. We find considerable thinning of the cortex between over this three year interval (on average 0.05 mm; 1.5%), particularly in the frontal poles, and orbitofrontal, paracentral, and occipital cortices. Cortical thinning was highly heritable at age 9 and age 12, and the degree of genetic influence differed for the various areas of the brain. One genetic factor affected left inferior frontal (Broca's area), and left parietal (Wernicke's area) thinning; a second factor influenced left anterior paracentral (sensory-motor) thinning. Two factors influenced cortical thinning in the frontal poles: one of decreasing influence over time, and another independent genetic factor emerging at age 12 in left and right frontal poles. Thus, thinning of the cerebral cortex is heritable in children between the ages 9 and 12. Furthermore, different genetic factors are responsible for variation in cortical thickness at ages 9 and 12, with independent genetic factors acting on cortical thickness across time and between various brain areas  during childhood brain development.
22155028	125	n = 125
22155982	13	n = 13	Transcranial direct current stimulation, a form of non-invasive brain stimulation, is showing increasing promise as an adjunct therapy in rehabilitation following stroke. However, although significant behavioural improvements have been reported in proof-of-principle studies, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. The rationale for transcranial direct current stimulation as therapy for stroke is that therapeutic stimulation paradigms increase activity in ipsilesional motor cortical areas, but this has not previously been directly tested for conventional electrode placements. This study was performed to test directly whether increases in ipsilesional cortical activation with transcranial direct current stimulation are associated with behavioural improvements in chronic stroke patients. Patients at least 6 months post-first stroke participated in a behavioural experiment (n = 13) or a functional magnetic resonance imaging experiment (n = 11), each investigating the effects of three stimulation conditions in separate sessions: anodal stimulation  to the ipsilesional hemisphere; cathodal stimulation to the contralesional hemisphere; and sham stimulation. Anodal (facilitatory) stimulation to the ipsilesional hemisphere led to significant improvements (5-10%) in response times with the affected hand in both experiments. This improvement was associated with  an increase in movement-related cortical activity in the stimulated primary motor cortex and functionally interconnected regions. Cathodal (inhibitory) stimulation to the contralesional hemisphere led to a functional improvement only when compared with sham stimulation. We show for the first time that the significant behavioural improvements produced by anodal stimulation to the ipsilesional hemisphere are associated with a functionally relevant increase in activity within the ipsilesional primary motor cortex in patients with a wide range of disabilities following stroke.
22155982	11	n = 11
22162203	29	n = 29	The anterior insula and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) are regarded as key brain structures associated with the integration of perceived phobic characteristics of external stimuli and the perception of ones own body responses that leads to emotional feelings. To test to what extent the activity in these two brain structures anatomically and functionally overlap during phobic reactions and interoception, we submitted the same group of phobic participants (n = 29; either spider or blood-injection-injury (BII) phobics) and controls (n = 17) to both type of experimental paradigms. Results showed that there was a clear anatomical overlap in the Blood Oxygen Level-Dependent (BOLD) responses within the anterior insula and ACC elicited during phobic symptom provocation and during interoceptive awareness. The activity within these two brain structures also showed to be correlated in the spider phobia group, but not in the BII phobic participants. Our results seem to support the idea that the activity within these two brain areas would be associated with the integration of perceived stimuli characteristics and bodily responses that lead to what we label as "fear." However, that seems not to be the case in BII phobia, where more research is needed in order to clarify to what extent that could be associated with the idiosyncratic physiological response that these patients present in front of phobic stimuli (i.e., drop in heart rate and blood pressure).
22162203	17	n = 17
22196742	30	n = 30	Language production has been found to be lateralized in the left hemisphere (LH)  for 95% of right-handed people and about 75% of left-handers. The prevalence of atypical right hemispheric (RH) or bilateral lateralization for reading and colateralization of production with word reading laterality has never been tested in a large sample. In this study, we scanned 57 left-handers who had previously been identified as being clearly left (N=30), bilateral (N=7) or clearly right (N=20) dominant for speech on the basis of fMRI activity in the inferior frontal  gyrus (pars opercularis/pars triangularis) during a silent word generation task.  They were asked to perform a lexical decision task, in which words were contrasted against checkerboards, to test the lateralization of reading in the ventral occipitotemporal region. Lateralization indices for both tasks correlated significantly (r=0.59). The majority of subjects showed most activity during lexical decision in the hemisphere that was identified as their word production dominant hemisphere. However, more than half of the sample (N=31) had bilateral activity for the lexical decision task without a clear dominant role for either the LH or RH, and three showed a crossed frontotemporal lateralization pattern. These findings have consequences for neurobiological models relating phonological and orthographic processes, and for lateralization measurements for clinical purposes.
22196742	7	n = 7
22196742	20	n = 20
22196742	31	n = 31
22197790	28	n = 28	Impulsivity symptoms of adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) such as increased risk taking have been linked with impaired reward processing. Previous studies have focused on reward anticipation or on rewarded executive functioning tasks and have described a striatal hyporesponsiveness and orbitofrontal alterations in adult and adolescent ADHD. Passive reward delivery and its link to behavioral impulsivity are less well understood. To study this crucial aspect of reward processing we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) combined with electrodermal assessment in male and female adult ADHD patients (N=28) and matched healthy control participants (N=28) during delivery of monetary and non-monetary rewards. Further, two behavioral tasks assessed risky decision making (game of dice task) and delay discounting. Results indicated that both groups activated ventral and dorsal striatum and the medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC) in response to high-incentive (i.e. monetary) rewards. A similar, albeit less strong activation pattern was found for low-incentive (i.e. non-monetary) rewards. Group differences emerged when comparing high and low incentive rewards directly: activation in the mOFC coded for the motivational change in reward delivery in healthy controls, but not ADHD  patients. Additionally, this dysfunctional mOFC activity in patients correlated with risky decision making and delay discounting and was paralleled by physiological arousal. Together, these results suggest that the mOFC codes reward value and type in healthy individuals whereas this function is deficient in ADHD. The brain-behavior correlations suggest that this deficit might be related to behavioral impulsivity. Reward value processing difficulties in ADHD should be considered when assessing reward anticipation and emotional learning in research  and applied settings.
22197790	28	n = 28
22200657	8	n = 8	Recent studies on fear generalization have demonstrated that fear-potentiated startle and skin conductance responses to a conditioned stimulus (CS) generalize  to similar stimuli, with the strength of the fear response linked to perceptual similarity to the CS. The aim of the present study was to extend this work by examining neural correlates of fear generalization. An initial experiment (N=8) revealed that insula reactivity tracks the conditioned fear gradient. We then replicated this effect in a larger independent sample (N=25). Activation in the insula, anterior cingulate, right supplementary motor cortex and caudate increased reactivity as generalization stimuli (GS) were more similar to the CS,  consistent with participants' overall ratings of perceived shock likelihood and pupillary response to each stimulus.
22200657	25	n = 25
22206877	51	n = 51	BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder (MDD), panic disorder, and social anxiety disorder are among the most prevalent and frequently co-occurring psychiatric disorders in adults and may be characterized by a common deficiency in processing of emotional information. METHODS: We used functional magnetic resonance imaging  during the performance of an emotional word encoding and recognition paradigm in  patients with MDD (n = 51), comorbid MDD and anxiety (n = 59), panic disorder and/or social anxiety disorder without comorbid MDD (n = 56), and control subjects (n = 49). In addition, we studied effects of illness severity, regional  brain volume, and antidepressant use. RESULTS: Patients with MDD, prevalent anxiety disorders, or both showed a common hyporesponse in the right hippocampus  during positive (>neutral) word encoding compared with control subjects. During negative encoding, increased insular activation was observed in both depressed groups (MDD and MDD + anxiety), whereas increased amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex activation during positive word encoding were observed as depressive state-dependent effects in MDD only. During recognition, anxiety patients showed  increased inferior frontal gyrus activation. Overall, effects were unaffected by  medication use and regional brain volume. CONCLUSIONS: Hippocampal blunting during positive word encoding is a generic effect in depression and anxiety disorders, which may constitute a common vulnerability factor. Increased insular  and amygdalar involvement during negative word encoding may underlie heightened experience of, and an inability to disengage from, negative emotions in depressive disorders. Our results emphasize a common neurobiological deficiency in both MDD and anxiety disorders, which may mark a general insensitiveness to positive information.
22206877	59	n = 59
22206877	56	n = 56
22206877	49	n = 49
22216234	26	n = 26	BACKGROUND: Altered hippocampal structure and function is a valuable indicator of possible conversion from amnestic type mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) to Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, little is known about the disrupted functional connectivity of hippocampus subregional networks in aMCI subjects. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: aMCI group-1 (n=26) and controls group-1 (n=18) underwent baseline and after approximately 20 months follow up resting-state fMRI scans. Integrity of distributed functional connectivity networks incorporating six hippocampal subregions (i.e. cornu ammonis, dentate gyrus and subicular complex, bilaterally) was then explored over time and comparisons made between groups. The ability of these extent longitudinal changes to separate unrelated groups of 30 subjects (aMCI-converters, n=6; aMCI group-2, n=12; controls group-2, n=12) were further assessed. Six longitudinal hippocampus subregional functional connectivity networks showed similar changes in aMCI subjects over time, which were mainly associated with medial frontal gyrus, lateral temporal cortex, insula, posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and cerebellum. However, the disconnection of hippocampal subregions and PCC may be a key factor of impaired episodic memory in aMCI, and the functional index of these longitudinal changes allowed well classifying independent samples of aMCI converters from non-converters (sensitivity was 83.3%, specificity was 83.3%) and controls (sensitivity was 83.3%, specificity was 91.7%). CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: It demonstrated that the functional changes in resting-state hippocampus subregional networks could be an important and early indicator for dysfunction that may be particularly relevant to early stage changes and progression of aMCI subjects.
22216234	18	n = 18
22216234	6	n = 6
22216234	12	n = 12
22216234	12	n = 12
22226903	45	n = 45	Brain circuits involved in language processing have been suggested to be compromised in patients with schizophrenia. This does not only include regions subserving language production and perception, but also auditory processing and attention. We investigated resting state network connectivity of auditory, language and attention networks of patients with schizophrenia and hypothesized that patients would show reduced connectivity. Patients with schizophrenia (n = 45) and healthy controls (n = 30) underwent a resting state fMRI scan. Independent components analysis was used to identify networks of the auditory cortex, left inferior frontal language regions and the anterior cingulate region, associated with attention. The time courses of the components where correlated with each other, the correlations were transformed by a Fisher's Z transformation, and compared between groups. In patients with schizophrenia, we observed decreased connectivity between the auditory and language networks. Conversely, patients showed increased connectivity between the attention and language network compared to controls. There was no relationship with severity of symptoms such as auditory hallucinations. The decreased connectivity between auditory and language processing areas observed in schizophrenia patients is consistent with earlier research and may underlie language processing difficulties. Altered anterior cingulate connectivity in patients may be a correlate of habitual suppression of unintended speech, or of excessive attention to internally generated speech. This altered connectivity pattern appears to be present independent of symptom severity, and may be suggestive of a trait, rather than a state characteristic.
22226903	30	n = 30
22227051	157	n = 157	A common polymorphism within the nitric oxide sythanse-1 (NOS1) gene (rs6490121), initially identified as risk variant for schizophrenia, has been associated with  variation in working memory and IQ. Here we investigated how this variation might be mediated at the level of brain structure and function. In healthy individuals  (N=157), voxel based morphometry was used to compare grey matter (GM) volume between homozygous and heterozygous carriers of the 'G' allele (i.e. the allele associated with impaired cognition and schizophrenia risk) and homozygous carriers of the non-risk 'A' allele. Functional brain imaging data were also acquired from 48 participants during performance of a spatial working memory (SWM) task, and analysed to determine any effect of NOS1 risk status. An a priori region-of-interest analysis identified a significant reduction in ventromedial prefrontal GM volume in 'G' allele carriers. Risk carriers also exhibited altered patterns of activation in the prefrontal cortex, caudate, and superior parietal lobe, which were characteristic of abnormal increases in activation in frontoparietal working memory networks and a failure to disengage regions of the  default mode network. These functional changes suggest a NOS1-mediated processing inefficiency, which may contribute to cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia. While the mechanisms by which NOS1 may influence brain structure and/or function  have not yet been well delineated, these data provide further evidence for a role of NOS1 in risk for schizophrenia via an impact upon cognitive function.
22230228	12	n = 12	It is tentatively estimated that 25% of people with early Alzheimer's disease (AD) show impaired awareness of disease-related changes in their own cognition. Research examining both normative self-awareness and altered awareness resulting  from brain disease or injury points to the central role of the medial prefrontal  cortex (MPFC) in generating accurate self-appraisals. The current project builds  on this work - examining changes in MPFC functional connectivity that correspond  to impaired self-appraisal accuracy early in the AD time course. Our behavioral focus was self-appraisal accuracy for everyday memory function, and this was measured using the Memory Function Scale of the Memory Awareness Rating Scale - an instrument psychometrically validated for this purpose. Using regression analysis of data from people with healthy memory (n=12) and people with impaired  memory due to amnestic mild cognitive impairment or early AD (n=12), we tested the hypothesis that altered MPFC functional connectivity - particularly with other cortical midline structures and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex - explains variation in memory self-appraisal accuracy. We spatially constrained (i.e., explicitly masked) our regression analyses to those regions that work in conjunction with the MPFC to evoke self-appraisals in a normative group. This empirically derived explicit mask was generated from the result of a psychophysiological interaction analysis of fMRI self-appraisal task data in a separate, large group of cognitively healthy individuals. Results of our primary  analysis (i.e., the regression of memory self-appraisal accuracy on MPFC functional connectivity) were generally consistent with our hypothesis: people who were less accurate in making memory self-appraisals showed attenuated functional connectivity between the MPFC seed region and proximal areas within the MPFC (including subgenual anterior cingulate cortex), bilateral dorsolateral  prefrontal cortex, bilateral caudate, and left posterior hippocampus. Contrary to our expectations, MPFC functional connectivity with the posterior cingulate was not significantly related to accuracy of memory self-appraisals. Results reported here corroborate findings of variable memory self-appraisal accuracy during the earliest emergence of AD symptoms and reveal alterations in MPFC functional connectivity that correspond to impaired memory self-appraisal.
22230228	12	n = 12
22234380	20	n = 20	RATIONALE: Smokers show heightened activation toward smoking-related stimuli and  experience increased cravings which can precipitate smoking cessation relapse. Exercise can be effective for modulating cigarette cravings and attenuating reactivity to smoking cues, but the mechanism by which these effects occur remains uncertain. OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to assess the effect of exercise on regional brain activation in response to smoking-related images during temporary nicotine abstinence. METHODS: In a randomised crossover design,  overnight abstinent smokers (n = 20) underwent an exercise (10-min moderate-intensity stationary cycling) and passive control (seating for the same  duration) treatment, following 15 h of nicotine abstinence. After each treatment, participants underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) brain scanning while viewing a random series of blocked smoking or neutral images. Self-reported cravings were assessed at baseline, mid-, and post-treatments. RESULTS: There was a significant interaction effect (treatment x time) for desire to smoke, F (2,32) = 12.5, p < 0.001, with significantly lower scores following the exercise at all time points compared with the control treatment. After both exercise and rest, significant areas of activation were found in areas of the limbic lobe and in areas associated with visual attention in response to smoking-related stimuli. Smokers showed increased activation to smoking images in areas associated with primary and secondary visual processing following rest, but not following a session of exercise. CONCLUSION: The study shows differing activation towards smoking images following exercise compared to a control treatment and may point to a neuro-cognitive process following exercise that mediates effects on cigarette cravings.
22258799	60	n = 60	In the context of chronic childhood emotional maltreatment (CEM; emotional abuse  and/or neglect), adequately responding to facial expressions is an important skill. Over time, however, this adaptive response may lead to a persistent vigilance for emotional facial expressions. The amygdala and the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) are key regions in face processing. However, the neurobiological correlates of face processing in adults reporting CEM are yet unknown. We examined amygdala and mPFC reactivity to emotional faces (Angry, Fearful, Sad, Happy, Neutral) vs scrambled faces in healthy controls and unmedicated patients with depression and/or anxiety disorders reporting CEM before the age of 16 years (n = 60), and controls and patients who report no childhood abuse (n = 75). We found that CEM was associated with enhanced bilateral amygdala reactivity to emotional faces in general, and independent of psychiatric status. Furthermore, we found no support for differential mPFC functioning, suggesting that amygdala hyper-responsivity to emotional facial perception in adults reporting CEM may be independent from top-down influences of the mPFC. These findings may be key in understanding the increased emotional sensitivity and interpersonal difficulties, that have been reported in individuals with a history of CEM.
22258799	75	n = 75
22258800	47	n = 47	Fear learning is a crucial process in the pathogeneses of psychiatric disorders,  which highlights the need to identify specific factors contributing to interindividual variation. We hypothesized variation in the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) and stressful life events (SLEs) to be associated with neural correlates of fear conditioning in a sample of healthy male adults (n = 47). Subjects were exposed to a differential fear conditioning paradigm after being preselected regarding 5-HTTLPR genotype and SLEs. Individual differences in brain activity as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), skin conductance responses and preference ratings were assessed. We report significant variation in neural correlates of fear conditioning as a function of 5-HTTLPR genotype. Specifically, the conditioned stimulus (CS(+)) elicited elevated activity within the fear-network (amygdala, insula, thalamus, occipital cortex) in subjects carrying two copies of the 5-HTTLPR S' allele. Moreover, our results  revealed preliminary evidence for a significant gene-by-environment interaction,  such as homozygous carriers of the 5-HTTLPR S' allele with a history of SLEs demonstrated elevated reactivity to the CS(+) in the occipital cortex and the insula. Our findings contribute to the current debate on 5-HTTLPR x SLEs interaction by investigating crucial alterations on an intermediate phenotype level which may convey an elevated vulnerability for the development of psychopathology.
22276111	10	n = 10	BACKGROUND: It is unclear whether and how elite athletes process physiological or psychological challenges differently than healthy comparison subjects. In general, individuals optimize exercise level as it relates to differences between expected and experienced exertion, which can be conceptualized as a body prediction error. The process of computing a body prediction error involves the insular cortex, which is important for interoception, i.e. the sense of the physiological condition of the body. Thus, optimal performance may be related to  efficient minimization of the body prediction error. We examined the hypothesis that elite athletes, compared to control subjects, show attenuated insular cortex activation during an aversive interoceptive challenge. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Elite adventure racers (n = 10) and healthy volunteers (n = 11) performed a continuous performance task with varying degrees of a non-hypercapnic breathing load while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging. The results indicate that (1) non-hypercapnic inspiratory breathing load is an aversive experience associated with a profound activation of a distributed set of brain areas including bilateral insula, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulated; (2) adventure racers relative to comparison subjects show greater accuracy on the continuous performance task during the aversive interoceptive condition; and (3) adventure racers show an attenuated right insula cortex response during and following the aversive interoceptive condition of non-hypercapnic inspiratory breathing load. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings support the hypothesis that elite athletes during an aversive interoceptive condition show better performance and an attenuated insular cortex  activation during the aversive experience. Interestingly, differential modulation of the right insular cortex has been found previously in elite military personnel and appears to be emerging as an important brain system for optimal performance in extreme environments.
22276111	11	n = 11
22281932	29	n = 29	Aberrant sensitivity of incentive neurocircuitry to nondrug rewards has been suggested as either a risk factor for or consequence of drug addiction. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we tested whether alcohol-dependent patients (ADP: n = 29) showed altered recruitment of ventral striatal (VS) incentive neurocircuitry compared to controls (n = 23) by: (1) cues to respond for monetary rewards, (2) post-response anticipation of rewards, or (3) delivery  of rewards. Using an instrumental task with two-stage presentation of reward-predictive information, subjects saw cues signaling opportunities to win $0, $1, or $10 for responding to a target. Following this response, subjects were notified whether their success would be indicated by a lexical notification ("Hit?") or by delivery of a monetary reward ("Win?"). After a variable interval, subjects then viewed the trial outcome. We found no significant group differences in voxelwise activation by task contrasts, or in signal change extracted from VS. Both ADP and controls showed significant VS and other limbic recruitment by pre-response reward anticipation. In addition, controls also showed VS recruitment by post-response reward-anticipation, and ADP had appreciable subthreshold VS activation. Both groups also showed similar mesolimbic responses  to reward deliveries. Across all subjects, a questionnaire measure of "hot" impulsivity correlated with VS recruitment by post-response anticipation of low rewards and with VS recruitment by delivery of low rewards. These findings indicate that incentive-motivational processing of nondrug rewards is substantially maintained in recovering alcoholics, and that reward-elicited VS recruitment correlates more with individual differences in trait impulsivity irrespective of addiction.
22281932	23	n = 23
22308323	18	n = 18	Individuals with developmental dyslexia (DD) show a disruption in posterior left-hemispheric neural networks during phonological processing. Additionally, compensatory mechanisms in children and adults with DD have been located within frontal brain areas. However, it remains unclear when and how differences in posterior left-hemispheric networks manifest and whether compensatory mechanisms  have already started to develop in the prereading brain. Here we investigate functional networks during phonological processing in 36 prereading children with a familial risk for DD (n = 18, average age = 66.50 mo) compared with age and IQ-matched controls (n = 18; average age = 65.61 mo). Functional neuroimaging results reveal reduced activation in prereading children with a family-history of DD (FHD(+)), compared with those without (FHD(-)), in bilateral occipitotemporal  and left temporoparietal brain regions. This finding corresponds to previously identified hypoactivations in left hemispheric posterior brain regions for school-aged children and adults with a diagnosis of DD. Furthermore, left occipitotemporal and temporoparietal brain activity correlates positively with prereading skills in both groups. Our results suggest that differences in neural  correlates of phonological processing in individuals with DD are not a result of  reading failure, but are present before literacy acquisition starts. Additionally, no hyperactivation in frontal brain regions was observed, suggesting that compensatory mechanisms for reading failure are not yet present.  Future longitudinal studies are needed to determine whether the identified differences may serve as neural premarkers for the early identification of children at risk for DD.
22308323	18	n = 18
22319604	19	n = 19	Obesity is characterized by an imbalance in the brain circuits promoting reward seeking and those governing cognitive control. Here we show that the dorsal caudate nucleus and its connections with amygdala, insula and prefrontal cortex contribute to abnormal reward processing in obesity. We measured regional brain glucose uptake in morbidly obese (n = 19) and normal weighted (n = 16) subjects with 2-[(1)(8)F]fluoro-2-deoxyglucose ([(1)(8)F]FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) during euglycemic hyperinsulinemia and with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while anticipatory food reward was induced by repeated presentations of appetizing and bland food pictures. First, we found that glucose uptake rate in the dorsal caudate nucleus was higher in obese than in normal-weight subjects. Second, obese subjects showed increased hemodynamic responses in the caudate nucleus while viewing appetizing versus bland foods in fMRI. The caudate also showed elevated task-related functional connectivity with  amygdala and insula in the obese versus normal-weight subjects. Finally, obese subjects had smaller responses to appetizing versus bland foods in the dorsolateral and orbitofrontal cortices than did normal-weight subjects, and failure to activate the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was correlated with high glucose metabolism in the dorsal caudate nucleus. These findings suggest that enhanced sensitivity to external food cues in obesity may involve abnormal stimulus-response learning and incentive motivation subserved by the dorsal caudate nucleus, which in turn may be due to abnormally high input from the amygdala and insula and dysfunctional inhibitory control by the frontal cortical  regions. These functional changes in the responsiveness and interconnectivity of  the reward circuit could be a critical mechanism to explain overeating in obesity.
22319604	16	n = 16
22344782	27	n = 27	An emerging issue in neuroscience is how to identify baseline state(s) and accompanying networks termed "resting state networks" (RSNs). Although independent component analysis (ICA) in fMRI studies has elucidated synchronous spatiotemporal patterns during cognitive tasks, less is known about the changes in EEG functional connectivity between eyes closed (EC) and eyes open (EO) states, two traditionally used baseline indices. Here we investigated healthy subjects (n = 27) in EC and EO employing a four-step analytic approach to the EEG: (1) group ICA to extract independent components (ICs), (2) standardized low-resolution tomography analysis (sLORETA) for cortical source localization of  IC network nodes, followed by (3) graph theory for functional connectivity estimation of epochwise IC band-power, and (4) circumscribing IC similarity measures via hierarchical cluster analysis and multidimensional scaling (MDS). Our proof-of-concept results on alpha-band power demonstrate five statistically clustered groups with frontal, central, parietal, occipitotemporal, and occipital sources. Importantly, during EO compared with EC, graph analyses revealed two salient functional networks with frontoparietal connectivity: a more medial network with nodes in the mPFC/precuneus which overlaps with the "default-mode network" (DMN), and a more lateralized network comprising the middle frontal gyrus and inferior parietal lobule, coinciding with the "dorsal attention network" (DAN). Furthermore, a separate MDS analysis of ICs supported the emergence of a pattern of increased proximity (shared information) between frontal and parietal clusters specifically for the EO state. We propose that the  disclosed component groups and their source-derived EEG functional connectivity maps may be a valuable method for elucidating direct neuronal (electrophysiological) RSNs in healthy people and those suffering from brain disorders.
22348885	84	n = 84	Two major influences on how the brain processes music are maturational development and active musical training. Previous functional neuroimaging studies investigating music processing have typically focused on either categorical differences between "musicians versus nonmusicians" or "children versus adults."  In the present study, we explored a cross-sectional data set (n=84) using multiple linear regression to isolate the performance-independent effects of age  (5 to 33 years) and cumulative duration of musical training (0 to 21,000 practice hours) on fMRI activation similarities and differences between melodic discrimination (MD) and rhythmic discrimination (RD). Age-related effects common  to MD and RD were present in three left hemisphere regions: temporofrontal junction, ventral premotor cortex, and the inferior part of the intraparietal sulcus, regions involved in active attending to auditory rhythms, sensorimotor integration, and working memory transformations of pitch and rhythmic patterns. By contrast, training-related effects common to MD and RD were localized to the posterior portion of the left superior temporal gyrus/planum temporale, an area implicated in spectrotemporal pattern matching and auditory-motor coordinate transformations. A single cluster in right superior temporal gyrus showed significantly greater activation during MD than RD. This is the first fMRI which  has distinguished maturational from training effects during music processing.
22353995	45	n = 45	Patients with psychosis have higher rates of childhood trauma, which is also associated with adverse effects on cognitive functions such as attention, concentration and mental speed, language, and verbal intelligence. Although the pathophysiological substrate for this association remains unclear, these cognitive deficits may represent the functional correlate of changes observed in  relation to trauma exposure in structures such as the amygdala and the hippocampus. Interestingly, these structures are often reported as altered in psychosis. This study investigated the association between childhood trauma, cognitive function and amygdala and hippocampus volume, in first-episode psychosis. We investigated 83 patients with first-episode psychosis and 63 healthy controls. All participants underwent an MRI scan acquired with a GE Sigma 1.5-T system, and a standardized neuropsychological assessment of general cognition, memory, processing speed, executive function, visuo-spatial abilities, verbal intelligence, and language. In a subsample of the patients (N=45) information on childhood trauma was collected with the Childhood Experience of Care and Abuse Questionnaire (CECA.Q). We found that amygdala, but not hippocampus, volume was significantly smaller (p=0.001) in patients compared to healthy controls. There was a trend level interaction for hippocampus volume between group and sex (p=0.056). A history of childhood trauma was associated with both worse cognitive performance and smaller amygdala volume. This smaller amygdala appeared to mediate the relationship between childhood trauma and performance on executive function, language and verbal intelligence in patients with psychosis. This points to a complex relationship between childhood trauma exposure, cognitive function and amygdala volume in first-episode psychosis.
22362200	154	n = 154	A rapidly increasing number of studies are quantifying the system-level network architecture of the human brain based on structural-to-structural and functional-to-functional relationships. However, a largely unexplored area is the nature and existence of "cross-modal" structural-functional relationships, in which, for example, the volume (or other morphological property) of one brain region is related to the functional response to a given task either in that same  brain region, or another brain region. The present study investigated whether the gray matter volume of a selected group of structures (superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyri, thalamus, and hippocampus) was correlated with the fMRI response to a working memory task, within a mask of regions previously identified as involved with working memory. The subjects included individuals with schizophrenia, their siblings, and healthy controls (n = 154 total). Using rigorous permutation testing to define the null distribution, we found that the volume of the superior and middle frontal gyri was correlated with working memory activity within clusters in the intraparietal sulcus (i.e., dorsal parietal cortex) and that the volume of the hippocampus was correlated with working memory activity within clusters in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and left inferior frontal gyrus. However, we did not find evidence that the identified structure-function relationships differed between subject groups. These results show that long-distance structural-functional relationships exist within the human brain. The study of such cross-modal relationships represents an additional approach for studying systems-level interregional brain networks.
22377511	15	n = 15	BACKGROUND: Biased causal attribution is a critical factor in the cognitive model of depression. Whereas depressed patients interpret events negatively, healthy people show a self-serving bias (internal attribution of positive events and external attribution of negative events). METHODS: Using fMRI, depressed patients (n=15) and healthy controls (n=15) were confronted with positive and negative social events and made causal attributions (internal vs. external). Functional data were analyzed using a mixed effects model. RESULTS: Behaviourally, controls  showed a self-serving bias, whereas patients demonstrated a balanced attributional pattern. Analysis of functional data revealed a significant group difference in a fronto-temporal network. Higher activation of this network was associated with non self-serving attributions in controls but self-serving attributions in patients. Applying a psycho-physiological interaction analysis, we observed reduced coupling between a dorsomedial PFC seed region and limbic areas during self-serving attributions in patients compared to controls. LIMITATIONS: Results of the PPI analysis are preliminary given the liberal statistical threshold. CONCLUSIONS: The association of the behaviourally less frequent attributional pattern with activation in a fronto-temporal network suggests that non self-serving responses may produce a self-related response conflict in controls, while self-serving responses produce this conflict in patients. Moreover, attribution-modulated coupling between the dorsomedial PFC and limbic regions was weaker in patients than controls. This preliminary finding suggests that depression may be associated with disturbances in fronto-limbic coupling during attributional decisions. Our results implicate that treatment of  major depression may benefit from approaches that facilitate reinterpretation of  emotional events in a more positive, more self-serving way.
22377511	15	n = 15
22378896	9	n = 9	The corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) system coordinates neuroendocrine and behavioral responses to stress and has been implicated in the development of major depressive disorder (MDD). Recent reports suggest that GG-homozygous individuals of a single nucleotide polymorphism (rs110402) in the CRH receptor 1  (CRHR1) gene show behavioral and neuroendocrine evidence of stress vulnerability. The present study explores whether those observations extend to the neuronal processing of emotional stimuli in humans. CRHR1 was genotyped in 83 controls and a preliminary sample of 16 unmedicated patients with MDD who completed a functional magnetic resonance imaging scan while viewing blocks of positive, negative, and neutral words. In addition, potential mediating factors such as early life stress, sex, personality traits, and negative memory bias were examined. Robust differences in blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal were found in healthy controls (A allele carriers > GG-homozygotes) in the right  middle temporal/angular gyrus while subjects were viewing negative versus neutral words. Among GG-homozygotes, BOLD signal in the subgenual cingulate was greater in MDD participants (n = 9) compared with controls (n = 33). Conversely, among A-carriers, BOLD signal was smaller in MDD (n = 7) compared with controls (n = 50) in the hypothalamus, bilateral amygdala, and left nucleus accumbens. Early life stress, personality traits, and levels of negative memory bias were associated with brain activity depending on genotype. Results from healthy controls and a preliminary sample of MDD participants show that CRHR1 single nucleotide polymorphism rs110402 moderates neural responses to emotional stimuli, suggesting a potential mechanism of vulnerability for the development of MDD.
22378896	33	n = 33
22378896	7	n = 7
22378896	50	n = 50
22386967	10	n = 10	It is hypothesized that the development of substance abuse (SA) may be due to imbalance in functions of the motivation-reward and behavioral inhibition systems in the brain. This speaks to the search for biological risk factors for SA in drug-naive children who also exhibit motivational and inhibitory control deficits; however, this type of research is currently lacking. The objective of this study was to establish a neurobiological basis for addiction vulnerability using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in drug-naive youth with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We hypothesized that children with ADHD alone would show higher activity in regions of the motivation-reward and behavioral inhibition systems than children with ADHD and a parental history  of SA. Toward this goal we scanned 20 drug-naive children with ADHD ages 8-13 while performing an event-related reward task. High (N=10) and low (N=10) risk subjects were identified, based on parental history of SA. The effects of anticipation, conflict, and reward were assessed with appropriate linear contrasts, and between-group differences were assessed using statistical parametric mapping. The two groups did not differ on behavioral measures of the task. The fMRI results show heightened activation in the brain motivational-reward system and reduced activation of the inhibitory control system in high-risk compared to low-risk children. These results suggest that a functional mismatch between these two systems may represent one possible biological underpinning of SA risk, which is conferred by a parental history of addiction.
22386967	10	n = 10
22393420	121	n = 121	A preference for immediate gratification is a central feature in addictive processes. However, the neural structures underlying reward delay tolerance are still unclear. Healthy participants (n = 121) completed a delay discounting questionnaire assessing the extent to which they prefer smaller immediate rewards to larger delayed reward after undergoing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning. Whole brain voxel-based morphometric analysis shows that delay discounting severity was negatively correlated with right prefrontal subgyral white matter volume and positively correlated with white matter volume in parahippocampus/hippocampus, after whole brain correction. This study might better our understanding of the neural basis of impulsivity and addiction.
22395430	23	n = 23	RATIONALE: The effects of adolescent marijuana use on the developing brain remain unclear, despite its prevalence. Arterial spin labeling (ASL) is a noninvasive imaging technique that characterizes neurovascular status and cerebral blood flow (CBF), potentially revealing contributors to neuropathological alterations. No studies to date have looked at CBF in adolescent marijuana users. OBJECTIVES: This study examined CBF in adolescent marijuana users and matched healthy controls at baseline and after 4 weeks of monitored abstinence. METHODS: Heavy adolescent marijuana users (n = 23, >200 lifetime marijuana use days) and demographically matched controls (n = 23) with limited substance exposure underwent an ASL brain scan at an initial session and after 4 weeks of sequential urine toxicology to confirm abstinence. RESULTS: Marijuana users showed reduced CBF in four cortical regions including the left superior and middle temporal gyri, left insula, left and right medial frontal gyrus, and left supramarginal gyrus at baseline; users showed increased CBF in the right precuneus at baseline, as compared to controls (corrected p values < 0.05). No between group differences were found at follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: Marijuana use may influence CBF in otherwise healthy adolescents acutely; however, group differences were not observed after several weeks of abstinence. Neurovascular alterations may contribute to or underlie changes in brain activation, neuropsychological performance, and mood observed in young cannabis users with less than a month of  abstinence.
22395430	23	n = 23
22414594	14	n = 14	In synesthesia, certain stimuli to one sensory modality lead to sensory perception in another unstimulated modality. In addition to other models, a two-stage model is discussed to explain this phenomenon, which combines two previously formulated hypotheses regarding synesthesia: direct cross-activation and hyperbinding. The direct cross-activation model postulates that direct connections between sensory-specific areas are responsible for co-activation and  synesthetic perception. The hyperbinding hypothesis suggests that the inducing stimulus and the synesthetic sensation are coupled by a sensory nexus area, which may be located in the parietal cortex. This latter hypothesis is compatible with  the disinhibited feedback model, which suggests unusual feedback from multimodal  convergence areas as the cause of synesthesia. In this study, the relevance of these models was tested in a group (n=14) of auditory-visual synesthetes by performing a functional connectivity analysis on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. Different simple and complex sounds were used as stimuli, and functionally defined seed areas in the bilateral auditory cortex (AC) and the left inferior parietal cortex (IPC) were used for the connectivity calculations.  We found no differences in the connectivity of the AC and the visual areas between synesthetes and controls. The main finding of the study was stronger connectivity of the left IPC with the left primary auditory and right primary visual cortex in the group of auditory-visual synesthetes. The results support the model of disinhibited feedback as a cause of synesthetic perception but do not suggest direct cross-activation.
22418015	44	n = 44	BACKGROUND: Gene by environment (GxE) interaction between genetic variation in the promoter region of the serotonin transporter gene (serotonin transporter-linked polymorphic region [5-HTTLPR]) and stressful life events (SLEs) has been extensively studied in the context of depression. Recent findings suggest increased neural and endocrine stress sensitivity as a possible mechanism conveying elevated vulnerability to psychopathology. Furthermore, these GxE mediated alterations very likely reflect interrelated biological processes. METHODS: In the present functional magnetic resonance imaging study, amygdala reactivity to fearful stimuli was assessed in healthy male adults (n = 44), who were previously found to differ with regard to endocrine stress reactivity as a function of 5-HTTLPR x SLEs. Furthermore, functional connectivity between the amygdala and the hypothalamus was measured as a potential mechanism linking elevated neural and endocrine responses during stressful/threatening situations.  The study sample was carefully preselected regarding 5-HTTLPR genotype and SLEs.  RESULTS: We report significant GxE interaction on neural response patterns and functional amygdala-hypothalamus connectivity. Specifically, homozygous carriers  of the 5-HTTLPR S' allele with a history of SLEs (S'S'/high SLEs group) displayed elevated bilateral amygdala activation in response to fearful faces. Within the same sample, a comparable GxE interaction effect has previously been demonstrated regarding increased cortisol reactivity, indicating a cross-validation of heightened biological stress sensitivity. Furthermore, S'S'/high SLEs subjects were characterized by an increased functional coupling between the right amygdala and the hypothalamus, thus indicating a potential link between neural and endocrine hyperreactivity. CONCLUSIONS: The present findings contribute to the ongoing debate on 5-HTTLPR x SLEs interaction and are discussed with respect to clinical implications.
22421385	12	n = 12	Episodic memory dysfunction, commonly assessed with word list recall, is the main characteristic of amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI). While brain pathology underlying this kind of memory impairment is well established in aMCI,  little is known about the effect of neurodegeneration on autobiographical memory. The present study investigated neuronal correlates of autobiographical memory in  aMCI patients (n=12) and healthy elderly controls (n=13) using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Additionally, voxel-based morphometry (VBM) was employed to reveal brain pathology in aMCI patients. Neuropsychological assessment showed significant impairment in episodic memory tasks (immediate and  delayed word list recall) in aMCI patients. Moreover, VBM revealed significantly  reduced gray matter concentration, which was most pronounced in the temporal lobes of aMCI patients. Despite episodic memory impairment and atrophy in areas that are associated with encoding and recall of episodic memories, aMCI patients  showed no alterations in brain activation associated with autobiographical memory retrieval. These findings could suggest that autobiographical memory is subserved by a different neuronal network than episodic memory and that the two memory systems are differently affected by aMCI.
22421385	13	n = 13
22446490	21	n = 21	Due to the physiological coupling with metabolism, brain perfusion is a potential aid in understanding the effects of medication on neural activity in vivo. In this study, arterial spin labeling (ASL) was used to quantify the effect of seven days of administration of paroxetine (20 mg), bupropion (150 mg) on cerebral blood flow levels at rest in a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover design  in N=21 healthy participants. Paroxetine administration was associated with diffuse cortical perfusion decrements, more marked in the prefrontal region, and  with decrements in the striatum, caudate and the basal forebrain. The effect of bupropion on the cortex was similar but less conspicuous. In the brainstem, there was suggestive evidence of perfusion decrements in the main serotonergic and noradrenergic nuclei. These results demonstrate the existence of effects on rest  perfusion of antidepressant medication of potential use in monitoring its action. The observed perfusion reductions may be related to compensatory decrements of monoaminergic neural activity in the initial phases of treatment that are observed under both drugs following the increase in extracellular concentration of transmitters.
22483790	16	n = 16	The cognitive reserve hypothesis proposes that the brain actively attempts to cope with age-related changes by using pre-existing cognitive networks (neural reserve) or enlisting compensatory processes (neural compensation). In a context  of visual selective attention, the current study compared task-related activation with BOLD fMRI signals in younger (N=16) and older (N=16) adults using a letter-name-matching task with two attentional load levels. In the low-load condition, the target letter might share the same identity (e.g., a/A) with one of two probes in the display, while in the high-load condition the display included four probes. The results suggest that there is an age-related change within the frontoparietal network that underlies visual selective attention processing. In the low-load condition, the older group needed to recruit more bilateral frontal regions to successfully perform the task, while the younger participants recruited more bilateral occipital regions, in agreement with the PASA (Posterior-Anterior Shift in Aging) phenomenon and the neural compensation hypothesis of cognitive reserve. In addition, in the high-load condition, we found a load-dependent posterior-anterior shift in the older participants, which  was not present in the younger ones, involving the anterior part of the cingulate cortex. By showing a load-dependent PASA, our study indicates that the PASA phenomenon is supported more by the compensation mechanism (solicited exclusively in older participants) than by the reserve.
22483790	16	n = 16
22485152	13	n = 13	The modern metaphor of the brain is that of a dynamic information processing device. In the current study we investigate how a core cognitive network of the human brain, the perceptual decision system, can be characterized regarding its spatiotemporal representation of task-relevant information. We capitalize on a recently developed information theoretic framework for the analysis of simultaneously acquired electroencephalography (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging data (fMRI) (Ostwald et al. (2010), NeuroImage 49: 498-516). We show how this framework naturally extends from previous validations in the sensory to the cognitive domain and how it enables the economic description of neural spatiotemporal information encoding. Specifically, based on simultaneous EEG-fMRI data features from n = 13 observers performing a visual perceptual decision task, we demonstrate how the information theoretic framework is able to  reproduce earlier findings on the neurobiological underpinnings of perceptual decisions from the response signal features' marginal distributions. Furthermore, using the joint EEG-fMRI feature distribution, we provide novel evidence for a highly distributed and dynamic encoding of task-relevant information in the human brain.
22495745	19	n = 19	Although autism is usually characterized with respect to sociocommunicative impairments, visual search is known as a domain of relative performance strength  in this disorder. This study used functional MRI during visual search in children with autism spectrum disorder (n = 19; mean age = 13;10) and matched typically developing children (n = 19; mean age = 14;0). We selected regions of interest within two attentional networks known to play a crucial role in visual search processes, such as goal-directed selective attention, filtering of irrelevant distractors, and detection of behaviorally-relevant information, and examined activation and connectivity within and between these attentional networks. Additionally, based on prior research suggesting links between visual search abilities and autism symptomatology, we tested for correlations between sociocommunicative impairments and behavioral and neural indices of search. Contrary to many previous functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging studies of autism that reported functional underconnectivity for task domains of  weakness, we found atypically increased connectivity within and between attentional networks in autism. Additionally, we found increased functional connectivity for occipital regions, both locally and for long-distance connections with frontal regions. Both behavioral and neural indices of search were correlated with sociocommunicative impairment in children with autism. This  association suggests that strengths in nonsocial visuospatial processing may be related to the development of core autistic sociocommunicative impairments.
22495745	19	n = 19
22505321	86	n = 86	BACKGROUND: Current models suggest that a variation in the promoter region of the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) is associated with altered amygdala reactivity not only towards negative but also towards positive stimuli, which has been neglected in the past. This association may possibly convey an elevated vulnerability for psychopathology like abuse, craving, and relapses. Since appetitive conditioning is a crucial mechanism in the pathogenesis of these psychiatric disorders, the identification of specific factors contributing to interindividual variation is important. METHODS: In the present study (N = 86), an appetitive conditioning paradigm was conducted, in which a neutral stimulus (CS+) was associated with appetitive stimuli, while a second stimulus (CS-) predicted their absence. Subjects were genotyped according to the 5-HTTLPR genotype. RESULTS: As the main result, we report a significant association between the 5-HTTLPR genotype and hemodynamic responses. Individuals with the s-allele displayed elevated conditioned bilateral amygdala activity in contrast to l/l-allele carriers. Further, increased hemodynamic responses in s-allele carriers were also found in the extended emotional network including the orbitofrontal cortex, the thalamus, and the ventral striatum. CONCLUSION: The present findings indicate an association of the 5-HTTLPR and altered conditioned  responses in appetitive conditioning. Further, the findings contribute to the ongoing debate on 5-HTTLPR dependent hemodynamic response patterns by emphasizing that s-allele carriers are not exclusively biased towards fearful, but also towards positive stimuli. In conclusion, our results imply that s-allele carriers might be better described as hyper-reactive towards salient stimuli, which may convey vulnerability for the development of psychiatric disorders.
22505330	13	n = 13	Joint attention behaviors include initiating one's own and responding to another's bid for joint attention to an object, person, or topic. Joint attention abilities in autism are pervasively atypical, correlate with development of language and social abilities, and discriminate children with autism from other developmental disorders. Despite the importance of these behaviors, the neural correlates of joint attention in individuals with autism remain unclear. This paucity of data is likely due to the inherent challenge of acquiring data during  a real-time social interaction. We used a novel experimental set-up in which participants engaged with an experimenter in an interactive face-to-face joint attention game during fMRI data acquisition. Both initiating and responding to joint attention behaviors were examined as well as a solo attention (SA) control  condition. Participants included adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (n =  13), a mean age- and sex-matched neurotypical group (n = 14), and a separate group of neurotypical adults (n = 22). Significant differences were found between groups within social-cognitive brain regions, including dorsal medial prefrontal  cortex (dMPFC) and right posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), during the RJA as compared to SA conditions. Region-of-interest analyses revealed a lack of  signal differentiation between joint attention and control conditions within left pSTS and dMPFC in individuals with ASD. Within the pSTS, this lack of differentiation was characterized by reduced activation during joint attention and relative hyper-activation during SA. These findings suggest a possible failure of developmental neural specialization within the STS and dMPFC to joint  attention in ASD.
22505330	14	n = 14
22505330	22	n = 22
22510531	11	n = 11	Limb amputation and chronic phantom limb pain (PLP) are both associated with neural alterations at all levels of the neuraxis. We investigated gray matter volume of 21 upper limb amputees and 14 healthy control subjects. Results demonstrate that amputation is associated with reduced gray matter in areas in the motor cortex representing the amputated limb. Additionally, patients show an  increase in gray matter in brain regions that belong to the dorsal and ventral visual stream. We subdivided the patient group into patients with medium to high  PLP (HPLP; N = 11) and those with slight PLP (SPLP; N = 10). HPLP patients showed reduced gray matter in brain areas involved in pain processing. SPLP patients showed a significant gray matter increase in regions of the visual stream. Results indicate that all patients may have an enhanced need for visual control to compensate the lack of sensory feedback of the missing limb. As we found these alterations primarily in the SPLP patient group, successful compensation may have an impact on PLP development. Therefore, we hypothesize that visual adaptation mechanisms may compensate for the lack of sensorimotor feedback and may therefore function as a protection mechanism against high PLP development.
22510531	10	n = 10
22514285	14	n = 14	Somatosensory afferents are represented within the cortical autonomic network (CAN). However, the representation of somatosensory afferents, and the consequent cardiovascular effects, may be modified by levels of baroreceptor input. Thus, we examined the cortical regions involved with processing somatosensory inputs during baroreceptor unloading. Neuroimaging sessions (functional magnetic resonance imaging [fMRI]) recorded brain activity during 30 mmHg lower-body negative pressure (LBNP) alone and combined with somatosensory stimulation (LBNP+SS) of the forearm (n = 14). Somatosensory processing was also assessed during increased sympathetic outflow via end-expiratory apnea. Heart rate (HR), blood pressure (BP), cardiac output (Q), and muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA) were recorded during the same protocols in a separate laboratory session.  SS alone had no effect on any cardiovascular or MSNA variable at rest. Measures of HR, BP, and Q during LBNP were not different compared with LBNP+SS. The rise in MSNA burst frequency was attenuated during LBNP+SS versus LBNP alone (8 vs. 12 bursts/min, respectively, P < 0.05). SS did not affect the change in MSNA during  apnea. Activations within the insula and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) observed during LBNP were not seen during LBNP+SS. Anterior insula and ACC activations occurring during apnea were not modified by SS. Thus, the absence of  insular and dorsal ACC activity during LBNP+SS along with an attenuation of MSNA  burst frequency suggest sympathoinhibitory effects of sensory stimulation during  decreased baroreceptor input by a mechanism that includes conjoint insula-dorsal  ACC regulation. These findings reveal that the level of baroreceptor input influences the forebrain organization of somatosensory afferents.
22524295	15	n = 15	Experiencing negative affect frequently precedes lapses in self-control for dieters, smokers, and drug addicts. Laboratory research has similarly shown that  inducing negative emotional distress increases the consumption of food or drugs.  One hypothesis for this finding is that emotional distress sensitizes the brain's reward system to appetitive stimuli. Using functional neuroimaging, we demonstrate that inducing negative affect in chronic dieters increases activity in brain regions representing the reward value of appetitive stimuli when viewing appetizing food cues. Thirty female chronic dieters were randomly assigned to receive either a negative (n = 15) or neutral mood induction (n = 15) immediately followed by exposure to images of appetizing foods and natural scenes during fMRI. Compared with chronic dieters in a neutral mood, those receiving a negative mood induction showed increased activity in the OFC to appetizing food images. In addition, activity to food images in the OFC and ventral striatum was correlated  with individual differences in the degree to which the negative mood induction decreased participants' self-esteem. These findings suggest that distress sensitizes the brain's reward system to appetitive cues, thereby offering a mechanism for the oft-observed relationship between negative affect and disinhibited eating.
22524295	15	n = 15
22528829	10	n = 10	We investigated how resting state (RS) functional connectivity (FC) of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) correlates with cognitive rehabilitation in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) patients. A neuropsychological assessment and RS fMRI at baseline and after 12 weeks were obtained from 20 RRMS  patients, who were assigned randomly to undergo treatment (n = 10) (treatment group-TG), which entailed computer-assisted cognitive rehabilitation of attention/information processing and executive functions for 3 days/week, or not  to receive any cognitive rehabilitation (n = 10) (control group-CG). Voxel-wise changes of ACC RS FC were assessed using SPM8. In both groups, at the two study time points, ACC activity was correlated with the bilateral middle and inferior frontal gyrus, basal ganglia, posterior cingulate cortex, cerebellum, precuneus,  middle temporal gyrus, and inferior parietal lobule (IPL). At follow up, compared to baseline, the TG showed an increased FC of the ACC with the right middle frontal gyrus (MFG) and right IPL, while the CG showed a decreased FC of the ACC  with the right cerebellum and right inferior temporal gyrus (ITG). A significant  "treatment x time" interaction was found for the increased FC of the right IPL and for the decreased FC of the right ITG. In the TG only, significant correlations (p < 0.001) were found between improvement of PASAT performance and  RS FC of the ACC with the right MFG (r = 0.88) and right IPL (r = 0.76). In MS, cognitive rehabilitation correlates with changes in RS FC of brain regions subserving the trained functions. fMRI might be useful to monitor rehabilitative  strategies in MS.
22528829	10	n = 10
22538086	14	n = 14	Subcortical structures are a key component of bilingual language processing. For  instance, there is now evidence that the head of the left caudate is involved in  controlling languages in bilingual individuals. On the other hand, the left putamen is hypothesized to be involved in articulatory processes but little is known on its engagement in bilingual language processing. Here, our hypothesis was that the left putamen of multilinguals is engaged when producing words in the less proficient language. We investigated this issue with event-related functional Magnetic Resonance (er-fMRI) in a group of multilinguals (n = 14) and  in monolinguals (n = 14) during a picture-naming task. Further, we hypothesized increased grey matter density in the left putamen as an effect of experience since multilinguals constantly face a major articulatory load (i.e., speaking multiple languages) during life. To test these hypotheses we measured structural  differences between multilinguals and monolinguals using voxel-based morphometry  (VBM). Our results indicate that multilinguals have increased activation in the left putamen for a non-native language, but only if they are not highly proficient in that language. In addition, we found increased grey matter density  in the left putamen of multilinguals compared to monolinguals. These findings highlight that the multilingual brain handles a complex articulatory repertoire (i.e., dealing with multiple languages) by inducing structural plasticity in the  left putamen.
22538086	14	n = 14
22569063	137	n = 137	Limited functional imaging evidence suggests that increased beta-amyloid deposition is associated with alterations in brain function, even in healthy older adults. However, the majority of these findings report on resting-state activity or functional connectivity in adults over age 60. Much less is known about the impact of beta-amyloid on neural activations during cognitive task performance, or the impact of amyloid in young and middle-aged adults. The current study measured beta-amyloid burden from PET imaging using (18)Florbetapir, in a large continuous age sample of highly-screened, healthy adults (N=137; aged 30-89 years). The same participants also underwent fMRI scanning, performing a memory encoding task. Using both beta-amyloid burden and age as continuous predictors of encoding activity, we report a dose-response relationship of beta-amyloid load to neural function, beyond the effects of age.  Specifically, individuals with greater amyloid burden evidence less neural activation in bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a region important for memory encoding, as well as reduced neural modulation in areas associated with default network activity: bilateral superior/medial frontal and lateral temporal  cortex. Importantly, this reduction of both activation and suppression as a function of amyloid load was found across the lifespan, even in young- and middle-aged individuals. Moreover, this frontal and temporal amyloid-reduced activation/suppression was associated with poorer processing speed, verbal fluency, and fluid reasoning in a subgroup of individuals with elevated amyloid,  suggesting that it is detrimental, rather than compensatory in nature.
22574175	19	n = 19	BACKGROUND: Prior research has shown that the amygdala of carriers of the short allele (s) of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene (5-HTTLPR) have a larger response to negative emotional stimuli and higher spontaneous activity during the resting state than non-carriers. However, recent studies have suggested that the  effects of 5-HTTLPR may be specific to different ethnic groups. Few studies have  been conducted to address this issue. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was conducted on thirty-eight healthy Han Chinese subjects (l/l group, n = 19; s/s group, n = 19) during the resting state and during an emotional processing task. Compared with the s/s group, the l/l group showed significantly increased regional homogeneity or local synchronization in the right amygdala during the resting state (|t|>2.028, p<0.05, corrected), but no significant difference was found in the bilateral amygdala in response to negative stimuli in the emotional  processing task. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: 5-HTTLPR can alter the spontaneous activity of the amygdala in Han Chinese. However, the effect of 5-HTTLPR on the amygdala both in task state and resting state in Asian population was no similar  with Caucasians. They suggest that the effect of 5-HTTLPR on the amygdala may be  modulated by ethnic differences.
22574175	19	n = 19
22578707	11	n = 11	INTRODUCTION: Traditionally, studies investigating the functional implications of age-related structural brain alterations have focused on higher cognitive processes; by increasing stimulus load, these studies assess behavioral and neurophysiological performance. In order to understand age-related changes in these higher cognitive processes, it is crucial to examine changes in visual and  auditory processes that are the gateways to higher cognitive functions. This study provides evidence for age-related functional decline in visual and auditory processing, and regional alterations in functional brain processing, using non-invasive neuroimaging. METHODS: Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), younger (n=11; mean age=31) and older (n=10; mean age=68) adults were imaged while observing flashing checkerboard images (passive visual stimuli) and  hearing word lists (passive auditory stimuli) across varying stimuli presentation rates. RESULTS: Younger adults showed greater overall levels of temporal and occipital cortical activation than older adults for both auditory and visual stimuli. The relative change in activity as a function of stimulus presentation rate showed differences between young and older participants. In visual cortex, the older group showed a decrease in fMRI blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal magnitude as stimulus frequency increased, whereas the younger group showed a linear increase. In auditory cortex, the younger group showed a relative increase as a function of word presentation rate, while older participants showed a relatively stable magnitude of fMRI BOLD response across all rates. When analyzing participants across all ages, only the auditory cortical activation showed a continuous, monotonically decreasing BOLD signal magnitude as a function of age. CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary findings show an age-related decline in demand-related, passive early sensory processing. As stimulus demand increases, visual and auditory cortex do not show increases in activity in older compared to younger people. This may negatively impact on the fidelity of information available to higher cognitive processing. Such evidence may inform future studies focused on cognitive decline in aging.
22578707	10	n = 10
22579645	11	n = 11	The recognition of facial expressions of emotion is impaired in semantic dementia (SD) and is associated with right-sided brain atrophy in areas known to be involved in emotion processing, notably the amygdala. Whether patients with SD also experience difficulty recognizing emotions conveyed by other media, such as  music, is unclear. Prior studies have used excerpts of known music from classical or film repertoire but not unfamiliar melodies designed to convey distinct emotions. Patients with SD (n = 11), Alzheimer's disease (n = 12) and healthy control participants (n = 20) underwent tests of emotion recognition in two modalities: unfamiliar musical tunes and unknown faces as well as volumetric MRI. Patients with SD were most impaired with the recognition of facial and musical emotions, particularly for negative emotions. Voxel-based morphometry showed that the labelling of emotions, regardless of modality, correlated with the degree of  atrophy in the right temporal pole, amygdala and insula. The recognition of musical (but not facial) emotions was also associated with atrophy of the left anterior and inferior temporal lobe, which overlapped with regions correlating with standardized measures of verbal semantic memory. These findings highlight the common neural substrates supporting the processing of emotions by facial and  musical stimuli but also indicate that the recognition of emotions from music draws upon brain regions that are associated with semantics in language.
22579645	12	n = 12
22579645	20	n = 20
22606228	30	n = 30	Cocaine addiction is characterized by impulsivity, impaired social relationships, and abnormal mesocorticolimbic reward processing, but their interrelationships relative to stages of cocaine addiction are unclear. We assessed blood-oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD) signal in ventral and dorsal striatum during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in current (CCD; n = 30) and  former (FCD; n = 28) cocaine dependent subjects as well as healthy control (HC; n = 31) subjects while playing an interactive competitive Domino game involving risk-taking and reward/punishment processing. Out-of-scanner impulsivity-related  measures were also collected. Although both FCD and CCD subjects scored significantly higher on impulsivity-related measures than did HC subjects, only FCD subjects had differences in striatal activation, specifically showing hypoactivation during their response to gains versus losses in right dorsal caudate, a brain region linked to habituation, cocaine craving and addiction maintenance. Right caudate activity in FCD subjects also correlated negatively with impulsivity-related measures of self-reported compulsivity and sensitivity to reward. These findings suggest that remitted cocaine dependence is associated  with striatal dysfunction during social reward processing in a manner linked to compulsivity and reward sensitivity measures. Future research should investigate  the extent to which such differences might reflect underlying vulnerabilities linked to cocaine-using propensities (e.g., relapses).
22606228	28	n = 28
22606228	31	n = 31
22611041	22	n = 22	It has been recently shown that 20 min of mechanical flutter stimulation induces  lasting motor cortical excitability changes, as assessed by transcranial magnetic stimulation in relaxed hand muscles. The present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study aims to examine if such neuromodulatory changes are reflected in the BOLD signal during a motor test. Therefore, two groups were recruited: one group receiving whole-hand flutter stimulation with a frequency of 25 Hz (FSTIM group, n = 22) and a second group receiving no stimulation (NOSTIM group, n = 22). As motor test finger-to-thumb tapping was performed to activate a wide sensorimotor network during the fMRI measurements. Three fMRI measurements were obtained with this test: before stimulation (PRE), after stimulation (POST1), and 1 h after stimulation (POST2). Three regions of interest (ROIs) were defined: primary motor area (M1), primary somatosensory area (S1), and supplementary motor area. In the absence of baseline differences between both groups, the FSTIM group showed increased movement-related brain activations compared with the NOSTIM group, both at POST1 and POST2. ROI analysis revealed increased blood-oxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) responses within contralateral S1 (+20%) and M1 (+25%) at POST1, which lasted until POST2. These poststimulatory effects within S1 and M1 obviously reflect neuroplastic changes associated with augmented cortical excitability. These findings are of high clinical relevance, for example, to improve the treatment of stroke patients.
22611041	22	n = 22
22614246	11	n = 11	Semantic dementia is a progressive neurodegenerative condition characterized by the profound and amodal loss of semantic memory in the context of relatively preserved episodic memory. In contrast, patients with Alzheimer's disease typically display impairments in episodic memory, but with semantic deficits of a much lesser magnitude than in semantic dementia. Our understanding of episodic memory retrieval in these cohorts has greatly increased over the last decade, however, we know relatively little regarding the ability of these patients to imagine and describe possible future events, and whether episodic future thinking is mediated by divergent neural substrates contingent on dementia subtype. Here,  we explored episodic future thinking in patients with semantic dementia (n=11) and Alzheimer's disease (n=11), in comparison with healthy control participants (n=10). Participants completed a battery of tests designed to probe episodic and  semantic thinking across past and future conditions, as well as standardized tests of episodic and semantic memory. Further, all participants underwent magnetic resonance imaging. Despite their relatively intact episodic retrieval for recent past events, the semantic dementia cohort showed significant impairments for episodic future thinking. In contrast, the group with Alzheimer's disease showed parallel deficits across past and future episodic conditions. Voxel-based morphometry analyses confirmed that atrophy in the left inferior temporal gyrus and bilateral temporal poles, regions strongly implicated in semantic memory, correlated significantly with deficits in episodic future thinking in semantic dementia. Conversely, episodic future thinking performance in Alzheimer's disease correlated with atrophy in regions associated with episodic memory, namely the posterior cingulate, parahippocampal gyrus and frontal pole. These distinct neuroanatomical substrates contingent on dementia group were further qualified by correlational analyses that confirmed the relation between semantic memory deficits and episodic future thinking in semantic dementia, in contrast with the role of episodic memory deficits and episodic future thinking in Alzheimer's disease. Our findings demonstrate that semantic knowledge is critical for the construction of novel future events, providing the necessary scaffolding into which episodic details can be integrated. Further research is necessary to elucidate the precise contribution of semantic memory to future thinking, and to explore how deficits in self-projection manifest on behavioural and social levels in different dementia subtypes.
22614246	11	n = 11
22614246	10	n = 10
22617632	25	n = 25	Interventions based on Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) are widely used to treat chronic pain, but the brain mechanisms responsible for these treatment effects are poorly understood. The aim of this study was to validate the relevance of the cortical control theory in response to an exposure-based form of CBT, Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, in patients with chronic pain. Forty-three female patients diagnosed with fibromyalgia syndrome were enrolled in a randomized, 12-week, waiting-list controlled clinical trial (CBT n=25; controls n=18). CBT was administered in groups of six patients during 12 weekly sessions.  Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during pressure-evoked pain was assessed before and after treatment or the 12-week period. Self-report questionnaires of depression and anxiety were administered pre- and posttreatment as well as 3 months following end of treatment. Patients treated with CBT reported larger improvement of fibromyalgia on the Patient Global Impression of Change measure, and improved depression and anxiety symptoms, compared to the waiting-list controls. However, there were no effects on clinical pain or pain sensitivity measures. An analysis of fMRI scans revealed that CBT led to increased activations in the ventrolateral prefrontal/lateral orbitofrontal cortex; regions associated with executive cognitive control. We suggest that CBT  changes the brain's processing of pain through an altered cerebral loop between pain signals, emotions, and cognitions; leading to increased access to executive  regions for reappraisal of pain. Our data thereby support our hypothesis about the activation of a cortical control mechanism in response to CBT treatment in chronic pain.
22617632	18	n = 18
22634219	21	n = 21	The first aim of the present study was to extend previous findings of similar cerebellar cortical areas being involved in verbal and spatial n-back working memory to the level of the cerebellar nuclei. The second aim was to investigate whether different areas of the cerebellar cortex and nuclei contribute to different working memory tasks (n-back vs. Sternberg tasks). Young and healthy subjects participated in two functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies using a 7 T MR scanner with its increased signal-to-noise ratio. One group of subjects (n=21) performed an abstract and a verbal version of an n-back task contrasting a 2-back and 0-back condition. Another group of subjects (n=23) performed an abstract and a verbal version of a Sternberg task contrasting a high load and a low load condition. A block design was used. For image processing of the dentate nuclei, a recently developed region of interest (ROI) driven normalization method of the dentate nuclei was applied (Diedrichsen et al., 2011). Whereas activated areas of the cerebellar cortex and dentate nuclei were not significantly different comparing the abstract and verbal versions of the n-back task, activation in the abstract and verbal Sternberg tasks was significantly different. In both n-back tasks activation was most prominent at the border of lobules VI and Crus I, within lobule VII, and within the more caudal parts of the dentate nucleus bilaterally. In Sternberg tasks the most prominent activations were found in lobule VI extending into Crus I on the right. In the verbal Sternberg task activation was significantly larger within right lobule VI compared to the abstract Sternberg task and compared to the verbal n-back task. Activations of rostral parts of the dentate were most prominent in the verbal Sternberg task, whereas activation of caudal parts predominated in the abstract Sternberg task. On the one hand, the lack of difference between abstract and verbal n-back tasks and the lack of significant lateralization suggest a more general contribution of the cerebellum to working memory regardless of the modality. On the other hand, the focus of activation in right lobule VI in the verbal Sternberg task suggests specific cerebellar contributions to verbal working memory. The verbal Sternberg task emphasizes maintenance of stimuli via phonological rehearsal, whereas central executive demands prevail in n-back tasks. Based on the model of working memory by Baddeley and Hitch (1974), the present results show that different regions of the cerebellum support functions of the central executive system and one of the subsidiary systems, the phonological loop.
22634219	23	n = 23
22644759	46	n = 46	The present study investigates the effects of trait anxiety on the neural efficiency of working memory component functions (manipulation vs. maintenance) in the absence of threat-related stimuli. For the manipulation of affectively neutral verbal information held in working memory, high- and low-anxious individuals (N = 46) did not differ in their behavioral performance, yet trait anxiety was positively related to the neural effort expended on task processing,  as measured by BOLD signal changes in fMRI. Higher levels of anxiety were associated with stronger activation in two regions implicated in the goal-directed control of attention--that is, right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and left inferior frontal sulcus--and with stronger deactivation in a region assigned to the brain's default-mode network--that is, rostral-ventral anterior cingulate cortex. Furthermore, anxiety was associated with a stronger functional coupling of right DLPFC with ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. We interpret our findings as reflecting reduced processing efficiency in high-anxious individuals and point out the need to consider measures of functional integration in addition to measures of regional activation strength when investigating individual differences in neural efficiency. With respect to the functions of working memory, we conclude that anxiety specifically impairs the processing efficiency of (control-demanding) manipulation processes (as opposed to mere maintenance). Notably, this study contributes to an accumulating  body of evidence showing that anxiety also affects cognitive processing in the absence of threat-related stimuli.
22669497	27	n = 27	Individuals with schizophrenia show a broad range of language impairments, similar to those observed in reading disability (RD). Genetic linkage and association studies of RD have identified a number of candidate RD-genes that are associated with neuronal migration. Some individuals with schizophrenia also show evidence of impaired cortical neuronal migration. We have previously linked RD-related genes with gray matter distributions in healthy controls and schizophrenia. The aim of the current study was to extend these structural findings and to examine links between putative RD-genes and functional connectivity of language-related regions in healthy controls (n = 27) and schizophrenia (n = 28). Parallel independent component analysis (parallel-ICA) was used to examine the relationship between language-related regions extracted from resting-state fMRI and 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning 5  RD-related genes. Parallel-ICA identified four significant fMRI-SNP relationships. A Left Broca-Superior/Inferior Parietal network was related to two KIAA0319 SNPs in controls but not in schizophrenia. For both diagnostic groups, a Broca-Medial Parietal network was related to two DCDC2 SNPs, while a Left Wernicke-Fronto-Occipital network was related to two KIAA0319 SNPs. A Bilateral Wernicke-Fronto-Parietal network was related to one KIAA0319 SNP only in controls. Thus, RD-genes influence functional connectivity in language-related regions, but no RD-gene uniquely affected network function in schizophrenia as compared to controls. This is in contrast with our previous study where RD-genes  affected gray matter distribution in some structural networks in schizophrenia but not in controls. Thus these RD-genes may exert a more important influence on  structure rather than function of language-related networks in schizophrenia.
22669497	28	n = 28
22684096	18	n = 18	The anterior insula has been proposed to play a crucial role in eating disorders. However, it is still poorly understood how the anterior insula is involved in anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN), which are characterized by opposite motivational responses to food. We applied a cue-reactivity paradigm using blood oxygen level-dependent functional magnetic resonance imaging in women with AN (N=18) and BN (N=20) and age-matched healthy controls (N=20). We defined  the left anterior insula as a region-of-interest and performed seed-based functional connectivity and effective connectivity MRI analysis. In response to food images compared to non-food images, both the AN group and BN group demonstrated increased activity in the left anterior insula. In the AN group, the left anterior insula demonstrated significant interactions with the right insula  and right inferior frontal gyrus. In the BN group, the left anterior insula demonstrated significant interactions with the medial orbitofrontal cortex. The distinct patterns of functional and effective connectivity of the anterior insula may contribute to the different clinical features of AN and BN.
22684096	20	n = 20
22684096	20	n = 20
22696400	150	n = 150	Major depression has been repeatedly associated with amygdala hyper-responsiveness to negative (but not positive) facial expressions at early,  automatic stages of emotion processing using subliminally presented stimuli. However, it is not clear whether this "limbic bias" is a correlate of depression  or represents a vulnerability marker preceding the onset of the disease. Because  childhood maltreatment is a potent risk factor for the development of major depression in later life, we explored whether childhood maltreatment is associated with amygdalar emotion processing bias in maltreated but healthy subjects. Amygdala responsiveness to subliminally presented sad and happy faces was measured by means of fMRI at 3 T in N = 150 healthy subjects carefully screened for psychiatric disorders. Childhood maltreatment was assessed by the 25-item childhood trauma questionnaire (CTQ). A strong association of CTQ-scores  with amygdala responsiveness to sad, but not happy facial expressions emerged. This result was further qualified by an interaction of emotional valence and CTQ-scores and was not confounded by trait anxiety, current depression level, age, gender, intelligence, education level, and more recent stressful life-events. Childhood maltreatment is apparently associated with detectable changes in amygdala function during early stages of emotion processing which resemble findings described in major depression. Limbic hyper-responsiveness to negative facial cues could be a consequence of the experience of maltreatment during childhood increasing the risk of depression in later life. Limitation: the present association of limbic bias and maltreatment was demonstrated in the absence of psychopathological abnormalities, thereby limiting strong conclusions.
22745490	510	n = 510	Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia. Much is known concerning AD pathophysiology but our understanding of the disease at the systems level remains incomplete. Previous AD research has used resting-state functional  connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fcMRI) to assess the integrity of functional networks within the brain. Most studies have focused on the default-mode network (DMN), a primary locus of AD pathology. However, other brain regions are inevitably affected with disease progression. We studied rs-fcMRI in  five functionally defined brain networks within a large cohort of human participants of either gender (n = 510) that ranged in AD severity from unaffected [clinical dementia rating (CDR) 0] to very mild (CDR 0.5) to mild (CDR 1). We observed loss of correlations within not only the DMN but other networks at CDR 0.5. Within the salience network (SAL), increases were seen between CDR 0  and CDR 0.5. However, at CDR 1, all networks, including SAL, exhibited reduced correlations. Specific networks were preferentially affected at certain CDR stages. In addition, cross-network relations were consistently lost with increasing AD severity. Our results demonstrate that AD is associated with widespread loss of both intranetwork and internetwork correlations. These results provide insight into AD pathophysiology and reinforce an integrative view of the  brain's functional organization.
22748614	16	n = 16	BACKGROUND: Despite increasing evidence that neuroanatomical abnormalities underlie pathological anxiety, social anxiety disorder (SAD)-although among the most common of anxiety disorders-has received little attention. With magnetic resonance imaging, we: 1) examined gray matter (GM) differences between generalized SAD and healthy control groups; 2) retested the findings in an independent clinical sample; and 3) tested for specificity by contrasting the SAD group to a separate group of panic disorder (PD) subjects. METHODS: The primary SAD group (n = 16) was required to meet DSM-IV criteria for SAD, with onset by age 30 years; control subjects (n = 20) had no lifetime history of anxiety. The replication sample included 17 generalized SAD and 17 control subjects. The PD comparison group (n = 16) was required to have no lifetime SAD. Images were acquired on a 1.5-Tesla GE Signa magnetic resonance imaging scanner with a three-dimensional T1-weighted spoiled gradient recalled pulse sequence. Morphological differences were determined with voxel-based morphometry, in SPM8.  RESULTS: After adjusting for age, gender, and total intracranial volume, SAD (as  compared with control) subjects had greater GM in the left parahippocampal and middle occipital, and bilateral supramarginal and angular cortices, and left cerebellum; and lower GM in bilateral temporal poles and left lateral orbitofrontal cortex. Cerebellar, parahippocampal, and temporal pole differences  were observed in both samples, survived whole brain corrections, and were not observed in the PD group, pointing to relative specificity to SAD. CONCLUSIONS: These findings parallel the functional literature on SAD and suggest structural abnormalities underlying the functional disturbances.
22748614	20	n = 20
22748614	16	n = 16
22768085	25	n = 25	Emotional maturity and social awareness are important for adolescents, particularly college students beginning to face the challenges and risks of the adult world. However, there has been relatively little research into personality  maturation and psychological development during late adolescence and the neural changes underlying this development. We investigated the correlation between psychological properties (neuroticism, extraversion, anxiety, and depression) and age among late adolescents (n = 25, from 18 years and 1 month to 22 years and 8 months). The results revealed that late adolescents became less neurotic, less anxious, less depressive and more extraverted as they aged. Participants then observed video clips depicting hand movements with and without a risk of harm (risk-taking or safe actions) during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The results revealed that risk-taking actions elicited significantly stronger activation in the bilateral inferior parietal lobule, temporal visual regions (superior/middle temporal areas), and parieto-occipital visual areas (cuneus, middle occipital gyri, precuneus). We found positive correlations of age and extraversion with neural activation in the insula, middle temporal gyrus, lingual gyrus, and precuneus. We also found a negative correlation of age and anxiety with activation in the angular gyrus, precentral gyrus, and red nucleus/substantia nigra. Moreover, we found that insula activation mediated the  relationship between age and extraversion. Overall, our results indicate that late adolescents become less anxious and more extraverted with age, a process involving functional neural changes in brain networks related to social cognition and emotional processing. The possible neural mechanisms of psychological and social maturation during late adolescence are discussed.
22770650	22	n = 22	BACKGROUND: Recent research has demonstrated that clinical depression can emerge  as early as the preschool period. Here, we examine brain function in children with a history of preschool-onset depression (PO-MDD) in comparison with healthy  children. METHODS: Participants were medication naive school-aged children (ages  7-11) with PO-MDD (n = 22) or no psychiatric history (n = 16) followed longitudinally as part of the Preschool Depression Study. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging measures of blood oxygen level-dependent signal to examine functional brain activity in response to emotionally valenced faces (sad, fearful, angry, happy, neutral) following a negative mood induction provided to all children. RESULTS: In categorical group comparisons, children with PO-MDD demonstrated increased activity in parietal cortex in response to sad faces but no differences in brain activity in a priori regions of interest (e.g., amygdala). However, in dimensional analyses, the severity of depression symptoms  at the baseline preschool assessment predicted increased responses to sad faces in amygdala, hippocampal, parietal, and orbital frontal regions. CONCLUSIONS: School-aged children with a history of PO-MDD showed patterns of functional brain responses to emotionally evocative stimuli similar to patterns found in adults and adolescents with major depression. These patterns were most strongly related  to the severity of depression during the preschool period, suggesting that the magnitude of early symptoms may be particularly important for understanding altered brain function. These findings suggest that an early episode of depression before age 6 may be associated with enduring brain change or may represent a biomarker that was present even before the preschool episode.
22770650	16	n = 16
22776455	88	n = 88	Previous anatomical volumetric studies have shown that healthy aging is associated with gray matter tissue loss in specific cerebral regions. However, these studies may have potentially missed critical elements of age-related brain  changes, which largely exist within interrelationships among brain regions. This  magnetic resonance imaging research aims to assess the effects of aging on the organization of gray matter structural covariance networks. Here, we used voxel-based morphometry on high-definition brain scans to compare the patterns of gray matter structural covariance networks that sustain different sensorimotor and high-order cognitive functions among young (n=88, mean age=23.5+/-3.1 years,  female/male=55/33) and older (n=88, mean age=67.3+/-5.9 years, female/male=55/33) participants. This approach relies on the assumption that functionally correlated brain regions show correlations in gray matter volume as a result of mutually trophic influences or common experience-related plasticity. We found reduced structural association in older adults compared with younger adults, specifically in high-order cognitive networks. Major differences were observed in the structural covariance networks that subserve the following: a) the language-related semantic network, b) the executive control network, and c) the default-mode network. Moreover, these cognitive functions are typically altered in the older population. Our results indicate that healthy aging alters the structural organization of cognitive networks, shifting from a more distributed (in young adulthood) to a more localized topological organization in older individuals.
22776455	88	n = 88
22784688	27	n = 27	Patients with schizophrenia show deficits in motivation, reward anticipation and  salience attribution. Several functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) investigations revealed neurobiological correlates of these deficits, raising the hypothesis of a common basis in midbrain dopaminergic signaling. However, investigations of drug-naive first-episode patients with comprehensive fMRI tasks are still missing. We recruited unmedicated schizophrenia spectrum patients (N=27) and healthy control subjects (N=27) matched for sex, age and educational levels. An established monetary reward anticipation task in combination with a novel task aiming at implicit salience attribution without the confound of monetary incentive was applied. Patients showed reduced right ventral striatal activation during reward anticipation. Furthermore, patients with a more pronounced hypoactivation attributed more salience to neutral stimuli, had more positive symptoms and better executive functioning. In the patient group, a more  differentially active striatum during reward anticipation was correlated positively to differential ventral striatal activation in the implicit salience attribution task. In conclusion, a deficit in ventral striatal activation during  reward anticipation can already be seen in drug-naive, first episode schizophrenia patients. The data suggest that rather a deficit in differential ventral striatal activation than a generally reduced activation underlies motivational deficits in schizophrenia and that this deficit is related to the aberrant salience attribution.
22784688	27	n = 27
22807028	20	n = 20	Autobiographical memory (AM) is episodic memory for personally experienced events. The brain areas underlying AM retrieval are known to include several prefrontal cortical and medial temporal lobe regions. Sex differences in AM recall have been reported in several behavioral studies, but the functional anatomical correlates underlying such differences remain unclear. This study used fMRI to compare the neural correlates of AM recall between healthy male and female participants (n = 20 per group). AM recall in response to positive, negative, and neutral cue words was compared to a semantic memory task involving  the generation of examples from a category using emotionally valenced cues. Behaviorally, females recalled more negative and fewer positive AMs compared with males, while ratings of arousal, vividness, and memory age did not differ significantly between sexes. Males and females also did not differ significantly  in their performance on control tasks. Neurophysiologically, females showed increased hemodynamic activity compared to males in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), dorsal anterior insula, and precuneus while recalling specific AMs (all valences combined); increased activity in the DLPFC, transverse temporal gyrus, and precuneus while recalling positive AMs; and increased activity in the  anterior cingulate cortex, precuneus, amygdala, and temporopolar cortex when recalling negative AMs. When comparing positive to negative AMs directly, males and females differed in their BOLD responses in the hippocampus and DLPFC. We propose that the differential hemodynamic changes may reflect sex-specific cognitive strategies during recall of AMs irrespective of the phenomenological properties of those memories.
22813951	73	n = 73	Decision making (DM) in the context of others often entails complex cognition-emotion interaction. While the literature suggests that the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), striatum, and amygdala are involved in valuation-based DM and hippocampus in context processing, how these neural mechanisms subserve the integration of cognitive and emotional values in a social context remains unclear. In this study we addressed this gap by systematically manipulating cognition-emotion interaction in a social DM context, when the participants played a card game with a hypothetical opponent in a behavioral study (n=73) and a functional magnetic-resonance-imaging study (n=16). We observed that payoff-based behavioral choices were influenced by emotional values carried by face pictures and identified neurocircuits involved in cognitive valuation, emotional valuation, and concurrent cognition-emotion value integration. Specifically, while the vmPFC, amygdala, and ventral striatum were all involved in both cognitive and emotional domains of valuation, these regions  played dissociable roles in social DM. The payoff-dependent responses in vmPFC and amygdala, but not ventral striatum, were moderated by the social context. Furthermore, the vmPFC, but not amygdala, not only encoded the opponent's gains as if self's losses, but also represented a "final common currency" during valuation-based decisions. The extent to which emotional input influenced choices was associated with the functional connectivity between the value-signaling amygdala and value integrating vmPFC, and also with the functional connectivity between the context-setting hippocampus and value-signaling amygdala and ventral  striatum. These results identify brain pathways through which emotion shapes subjective values in a social DM context.
22813951	16	n = 16
22818781	12	n = 12	BACKGROUND: To translate our knowledge about neuroanatomy of bipolar disorder (BD) into a diagnostic tool, it is necessary to identify the neural signature of  predisposition for BD and separate it from effects of long-standing illness and treatment. Thus, we examined the associations among genetic risk, illness burden, lithium treatment, and brain structure in BD. METHODS: This is a two-center, replication-design, structural magnetic resonance imaging study. First, we investigated neuroanatomic markers of familial predisposition by comparing 50 unaffected and 36 affected relatives of BD probands as well as 49 control subjects using modulated voxel-based morphometry. Second, we investigated effects of long-standing illness and treatment on the identified markers in 19 young participants early in the course of BD, 29 subjects with substantial burden of long-lasting BD and either minimal lifetime (n = 12), or long-term ongoing (n = 17) lithium treatment. RESULTS: Five groups, including the unaffected and affected relatives of BD probands from each center as well as participants early  in the course of BD showed larger right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) volumes than control subjects (corrected p < .001). The rIFG volume correlated negatively with illness duration (corrected p < .01) and, relative to the controls, was smaller among BD individuals with long-term illness burden and minimal lifetime lithium exposure (corrected p < .001). Li-treated subjects had normal rIFG volumes despite substantial illness burden. CONCLUSIONS: Brain structural changes in BD may result from interplay between illness burden and compensatory processes, which may be enhanced by lithium treatment. The rIFG volume could aid  in identification of subjects at risk for BD even before any behavioral manifestations.
22818781	17	n = 17
22819968	40	n = 40	Short-term abstinent alcoholics have shown increased engagement of reward regions and reduced engagement of executive control regions. There is no report yet on whether these differences can predict relapse. This is the first study that investigates whether differences in resting-state networks can predict later relapse. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data were collected  from 69 short-term abstinent alcoholics. Participants performed the affective go/no-go task outside of the scanner. At 6-month follow-up, participants were grouped as abstainers (N = 40; age: M = 46.70, standard deviation [SD] = 6.83) and relapsers (N = 29; age: M = 46.91, SD = 7.25). We examined baseline resting-state synchrony (RSS) using seed-based measures. Compared with abstainers, relapsers showed significantly decreased RSS within both the reward and executive control networks as well as within the visual network (P < 0.05). Lower RSS in relapsers could predict relapse (P < 0.05) and was significantly correlated with poor inhibitory control of emotional-laden stimuli (P < 0.017) and with alcohol use (P < 0.05). Results suggest that lower RSS during short-term abstinence may predict subsequent relapse. The association of lower RSS with poorer inhibitory control suggests that low RSS may constitute a faulty foundation for future responses to external cues, which can be manifested as the  inability to inhibit behavior.
22819968	29	n = 29
22820891	7	n = 7	Children prenatally exposed to tobacco exhibit higher rates of learning and emotional-behavioral problems related to worse working memory performance. Brain  function, however, among tobacco exposed children while performing a working memory task has not previously been examined. This study compared the brain function of tobacco-exposed (n = 7) and unexposed (n = 11) 12-year-olds during a  number N-back working memory task using an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) design. Prenatal alcohol exposure, neonatal medical problems, environmental risk, and sex were statistically controlled. Tobacco-exposed children showed greater activation in inferior parietal regions,  whereas unexposed children showed greater activation in inferior frontal regions. These differences were observed in the context of correct responses, suggesting that exposed and unexposed children use different brain regions and approaches to succeed in working memory tasks. Implications for future research and intervention are discussed.
22820891	11	n = 11
22848692	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: Little is known about how spontaneous brain activity progresses from  non-hepatic encephalopathy (non-HE) to minimal HE (MHE). The purpose of this study was to evaluate the evolution pattern of spontaneous brain activities in cirrhotic patients using resting-state fMRI with a regional homogeneity (ReHo) method. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Resting-state fMRI data were acquired in  47 cirrhotic patients (minimal HE [MHE], n = 20, and non-HE, n = 27) and 25 age-and sex-matched healthy controls. The Kendall's coefficient of concordance (KCC) was used to measure the regional homogeneity. The regional homogeneity maps were compared with ANOVA tests among MHE, non-HE, and healthy control groups and  t-tests between each pair in a voxel-wise way. Correlation analyses were performed to explore the relationships between regional ReHo values and Child-Pugh scores, number connection test type A (NCT-A), digit symbol test (DST) scores, venous blood ammonia levels. Compared with healthy controls, both MHE and non-HE patients showed decreased ReHo in the bilateral frontal, parietal and temporal lobes and increased ReHo in the bilateral caudate. Compared with the non-HE, MHE patients showed decreased ReHo in the bilateral precuneus, cuneus and supplementary motor area (SMA). The NCT-A of cirrhotic patients negatively correlated with ReHo values in the precuneus, cuneus and lingual gyrus. DST scores positively correlated with ReHo values in the cuneus, precuneus and lingual gyrus, and negatively correlated with ReHo values in the bilateral caudate (P<0.05, AlphaSim corrected). CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Diffused abnormal homogeneity of baseline brain activity was nonspecific for MHE, and only the progressively decreased ReHo in the SMA and the cuneus, especially for the latter, might be associated with the development of MHE. The ReHo analysis may be potentially valuable for detecting the development from non-HE to MHE.
22848692	27	n = 27
22855822	292	n = 292	Episodic memory declines with advancing age. Neuroimaging studies have associated such decline to age-related changes in general cognitive-control networks as well as to changes in process-specific encoding or retrieval networks. To assess the specific influence of aging on encoding and retrieval processes and associated brain systems, it is vital to dissociate encoding and retrieval from each other and from shared cognitive-control processes. We used multivariate partial-least-squares to analyze functional magnetic resonance imaging data from  a large population-based sample (n = 292, 25-80 years). The participants performed a face-name paired-associates task and an active baseline task. The analysis revealed two significant network patterns. The first reflected a process-general encoding-retrieval network that included frontoparietal cortices  and posterior hippocampus. The second pattern dissociated encoding and retrieval  networks. The anterior hippocampus was differentially engaged during encoding. Brain scores, representing whole-brain integrated measures of how strongly an individual recruited a brain network, were correlated with cognitive performance  and chronological age. The scores from the general cognitive-control network correlated negatively with episodic memory performance and positively with age. The encoding brain scores, which strongly reflected hippocampal functioning, correlated positively with episodic memory performance and negatively with age. Univariate analyses confirmed that bilateral hippocampus showed the most pronounced activity reduction in older age, and brain structure analyses found that the activity reduction partly related to hippocampus atrophy. Collectively,  these findings suggest that age-related structural brain changes underlie age-related reductions in the efficient recruitment of a process-specific encoding network, which cascades into upregulated recruitment of a general cognitive-control network.
22871393	30	n = 30	BACKGROUND: Impaired response inhibition and poor impulse control are hallmarks of the manic phase of bipolar disorder but are also present during depressive and, to a lesser degree, euthymic periods. The neural mechanisms underlying these impairments are poorly understood, including how mechanisms are related to bipolar trait or state effects. METHODS: One-hundred four unmedicated participants with bipolar mania (BM) (n = 30), bipolar depression (BD) (n = 30),  bipolar euthymia (BE) (n = 14), and healthy control subjects (n = 30) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging during emotional and nonemotional go/no-go  tasks. The go/no-go task requires participants to press a button for go stimuli,  while inhibiting the response to no-go trials. In separate blocks, participants inhibited the response to happy faces, sad faces, or letters. RESULTS: The BE group had higher insula activity during happy face inhibition and greater activity in left inferior frontal gyrus during sad face inhibition, demonstrating bipolar trait effects. Relative to the BE group, BD and BM groups demonstrated lower insula activity during inhibition of happy faces, though the depressed sample had lower activity than manic patients. The BD and BM groups had a greater response to inhibiting sad faces in emotion processing and regulation regions, including putamen, insula, and lateral prefrontal cortex. The manic group also had higher activity in insula and putamen during neutral letter inhibition. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest distinct trait- and state-related neural abnormalities during response inhibition in bipolar disorder, with implications for future research and treatment.
22871393	30	n = 30
22871393	14	n = 14
22871393	30	n = 30
22887827	18	n = 18	Previous functional neuroimaging studies have shown brain activation abnormalities in clinically presymptomatic carriers of the Huntington's disease (preHD) gene mutation when performing complex cognitive tasks. However, little is known about the neural correlates of attentional processes in preHD. In this study, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate basic aspects of attentional processing in preHD individuals (n = 18) compared to healthy participants (n = 18) during an alertness task. Uni- and multivariate statistical techniques were used to assess task-related regional brain activation and functional network connectivity. Compared to healthy controls, preHD individuals  near to the estimated onset of clinical signs showed lower activation of right frontostriatal regions during phasic alertness (P < 0.001, uncorrected). Decreased striatal activation in this preHD subgroup was also evident when compared with those preHD individuals far from the estimated onset of HD signs. Lower putaminal activity was associated with longer reaction times and with proximity to onset. In addition, preHD participants near to onset had lower functional connectivity of motor regions when compared with controls and preHD individuals far from onset. Our data suggest that while alertness-related performance remains normal, the underlying frontostriatal activity and motor cortex connectivity decline only when approaching the onset of unequivocal signs  of HD. However, these attentional network changes might not be the sole explanation for the differences in cognitive task performance previously observed in preHD.
22887827	18	n = 18
22901696	235	n = 235	We examined performance and functional magnetic resonance imaging activity in participants (n = 235) aged 17-81 years on a nonverbal recognition memory task, figural memory. Reaction time, error rate, and response bias measures indicated that the youngest and oldest participants were faster, made fewer errors, and showed a more conservative response bias than participants in the median age ranges. Encoding and Recognition phases activated a distributed bilateral network encompassing prefrontal, subcortical, lateral, and medial temporal and occipital  regions. Activation during Encoding phase did not correlate with age. During Recognition, task-related activation for correctly identified targets (Hit-Targets) correlated linearly positively with age; nontask related activity correlated negative quadratically with age. During correctly identified distractors (Hit-Distractors) activity in task-related regions correlated positive linearly with age, nontask activity showed positive and negative quadratic relationships with age. Missed-Targets activity did not correlate with  age. We concluded that figural memory performance and functional magnetic resonance imaging activity during Recognition but not Encoding was affected both  by continued maturation of the brain in the early 20s and compensatory recruitment of additional brain regions during recognition memory in old age.
22911738	12	n = 12	Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) experience impaired initiation and inhibition of movements such as difficulty to start/stop walking. At single-joint level this is accompanied by reduced inhibition of antagonist muscle activity. While normal basal ganglia (BG) contributions to motor control include selecting  appropriate muscles by inhibiting others, it is unclear how PD-related changes in BG function cause impaired movement initiation and inhibition at single-joint level. To further elucidate these changes we studied 4 right-hand movement tasks  with fMRI, by dissociating activations related to abrupt movement initiation, inhibition and gradual movement modulation. Initiation and inhibition were inferred from ballistic and stepwise interrupted movement, respectively, while smooth wrist circumduction enabled the assessment of gradually modulated movement. Task-related activations were compared between PD patients (N = 12) and healthy subjects (N = 18). In healthy subjects, movement initiation was characterized by antero-ventral striatum, substantia nigra (SN) and premotor activations while inhibition was dominated by subthalamic nucleus (STN) and pallidal activations, in line with the known role of these areas in simple movement. Gradual movement mainly involved antero-dorsal putamen and pallidum. Compared to healthy subjects, patients showed reduced striatal/SN and increased pallidal activation for initiation, whereas for inhibition STN activation was reduced and striatal-thalamo-cortical activation increased. For gradual movement  patients showed reduced pallidal and increased thalamo-cortical activation. We conclude that PD-related changes during movement initiation fit the (rather static) model of alterations in direct and indirect BG pathways. Reduced STN activation and regional cortical increased activation in PD during inhibition and gradual movement modulation are better explained by a dynamic model that also takes into account enhanced responsiveness to external stimuli in this disease and the effects of hyper-fluctuating cortical inputs to the striatum and STN in particular.
22911738	18	n = 18
22939991	28	n = 28	BACKGROUND: Dopaminergic activity plays a role in mediating the rewarding aspects of abused drugs, including nicotine. Nicotine modulates the reinforcing properties of other motivational stimuli, yet the mechanisms of this interaction  are poorly understood. This study aimed to ascertain the impact of nicotine exposure on neuronal activity associated with reinforcing outcomes in dependent smokers. METHODS: Smokers (n = 28) and control subjects (n = 28) underwent functional imaging during performance of a monetary incentive delay task. Using a randomized, counterbalanced design, smokers completed scanning after placement of a nicotine or placebo patch; nonsmokers were scanned twice without nicotine manipulation. In regions along dopaminergic pathway trajectories, we considered event-related activity for valence (reward/gain vs. punishment/loss), magnitude (small, medium, large), and outcome (successful vs. unsuccessful). RESULTS: Both  nicotine and placebo patch conditions were associated with reduced activity in regions supporting anticipatory valence, including ventral striatum. In contrast, relative to controls, acute nicotine increased activity in dorsal striatum for anticipated magnitude. Across conditions, anticipatory valence-related activity in the striatum was negatively associated with plasma nicotine concentration, whereas the number of cigarettes daily correlated negatively with loss anticipation activity in the medial prefrontal cortex only during abstinence. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a partial dissociation in the state- and trait-specific effects of smoking and nicotine exposure on magnitude- and valence-dependent anticipatory activity within discrete reward processing brain regions. Such variability may help explain, in part, nicotine's impact on the reinforcing properties of nondrug stimuli and speak to the continued motivation to smoke and cessation difficulty.
22939991	28	n = 28
22956672	25	n = 25	Amygdala structural and functional abnormalities have been associated to reactive aggression in previous studies. However, the possible linkage of these two types  of anomalies has not been examined. We hypothesized that they would coincide in the same localizations, would be correlated in intensity and would be mediated by reactive aggression personality traits. Here violent (n = 25) and non-violent (n  = 29) men were recruited on the basis of their reactive aggression. Callous-unemotional (CU) traits were also assessed. Gray matter concentration (gmC) and reactivity to fearful and neutral facial expressions were measured in dorsal and ventral amygdala partitions. The difference between responses to fearful and neutral facial expressions was calculated (F/N-difference). Violent individuals exhibited a smaller F/N-difference and gmC in the left dorsal amygdala, where a significant coincidence was found in a conjunction analysis. Moreover, the left amygdala F/N-difference and gmC were correlated to each other, an effect mediated by reactive aggression but not by CU. The F/N-difference was caused by increased reactivity to neutral faces. This suggests that anatomical anomalies within local circuitry (and not only altered input) may underlie the amygdala hyper-reactivity to social signals which is characteristic of reactive aggression.
22956672	29	n = 29
22972952	72	n = 72	Neuroimaging studies have revealed a number of regions in the human brain that respond to faces. However, the way these regions interact is a matter of current  debate. The aim of this study was to use functional MRI to define face-selective  regions in the human brain and then determine how these regions interact in a large population of subjects (n = 72). We found consistent face selectivity in the core face regions of the occipital and temporal lobes: the fusiform face area (FFA), occipital face area (OFA), and superior temporal sulcus (STS). Face selectivity extended into the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), precuneus (PCu), superior colliculus (SC), amygdala (AMG), and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). We found evidence for significant functional connectivity between the core face-selective regions, particularly between the OFA and FFA. However, we found that the covariation in activity between corresponding face regions in different  hemispheres (e.g., right and left FFA) was higher than between different face regions in the same hemisphere (e.g., right OFA and right FFA). Although functional connectivity was evident between regions in the core and extended network, there were significant differences in the magnitude of the connectivity  between regions. Activity in the OFA and FFA were most correlated with the IPS, PCu, and SC. In contrast, activity in the STS was most correlated with the AMG and IFG. Correlations between the extended regions suggest strong functional connectivity between the IPS, PCu, and SC. In contrast, the IFG was only correlated with the AMG. This study reveals that interhemispheric as well as intrahemispheric connections play an important role in face perception.
22981810	41	n = 41	Episodic memory, or the ability to form and retrieve conscious memories about specific past events, improves during childhood. Previous adult neuroimaging results indicate a central role of the hippocampus in episodic retrieval, but it  is not clear whether the contribution of the hippocampus changes during development. Traditionally, developmental improvements in episodic retrieval have been thought to depend on strategic processes mediated by the prefrontal cortex (PFC), a region that is considered to have a protracted course of development relative to the hippocampus. The primary goal of the present study was to test the hypothesis that the development of episodic retrieval is also associated with changes in hippocampal function. Children ages 8- to 11-years-old and adults ages 18-25 (N = 41) encoded black and white line drawings surrounded by either a green or red border. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were acquired while participants attempted to recall which colour was originally paired with each drawing. Correct recall of item-colour pairings indicated successful episodic retrieval. Activity in the anterior hippocampus, but not in the posterior hippocampus, was associated with episodic retrieval in adults, whereas  activity in the posterior, but not in the anterior hippocampus, was associated with episodic retrieval in children. Developmental differences were also found in regions in anterior lateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex. Overall, these results support the view that the development of episodic memory is supported by  functional changes in the hippocampus as well as in other critical cortical regions.
22985694	239	n = 239	BACKGROUND: The Semantic Object Retrieval Task (SORT) requires participants to indicate whether word pairs recall a third object. Schizophrenia individuals (SZ) tend to report associations between nonassociated word pairs; this overretrieval  is related to formal thought disorder (FTD). Since semantic memory impairments and psychosis are also found in bipolar disorder (BP), we examined whether SORT impairments and their relationship to symptoms are also present in BP. METHODS: Participants (n = 239; healthy control subjects [HC] = 133; BP = 32; SZ = 74) completed SORT while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning. RESULTS: Retrieval accuracy negatively correlated with negative symptoms and no-retrieval accuracy negatively correlated with FTD severity in SZ  but not BP. Retrieval versus no-retrieval trials activated a distributed fronto-parieto-temporal network; bilateral inferior parietal lobule (IPL) activity was larger in HC versus SZ and HC versus BP, with no difference in SZ versus BP. Right IPL activity positively correlated with positive and general psychosis symptoms in SZ but not BP. CONCLUSIONS: SZ reported more associations between unrelated word pairs than HC; this overretrieval increased with FTD severity. Schizophrenia individuals were also more likely to fail to find associations between related word pairs; this underretrieval increased with negative symptom severity. fMRI symptom correlations in IPL in SZ are consistent  with arguments that IPL abnormality relates to loosening of associations in SZ. By comparison, BP showed intermediate impairments on SORT, uncorrelated with symptoms, suggesting that the relationship between SORT performance, fMRI activity, and psychotic symptoms is schizophrenia-specific.
22992490	22	n = 22	Episodic memory deficits are proposed as a potential intermediate phenotype of schizophrenia. We examined deficits in visual episodic memory and associated brain activation differences among early course schizophrenia (n=22), first-degree relatives (n=16) and healthy controls without personal or family history of psychotic disorders (n=28). Study participants underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging on a 3T scanner while performing visual episodic memory encoding and retrieval task. We examined in-scanner behavioral performance evaluating response time and accuracy of performance. Whole-brain BOLD response differences were analyzed using SPM5 correcting for multiple comparisons. There was an incremental increase in response time among the study groups (healthy controls<first-degree relatives<schizophrenia) with no differences in accuracy for encoding. Response time for retrieval was significantly increased in schizophrenia subjects compared to healthy controls with no difference in accuracy. Although there were no significant differences in BOLD responses for the encoding task, we noted increased BOLD response to retrieval in the prefrontal regions (Brodmann areas 9 and 8), thalamus and insula among the schizophrenia subjects compared to healthy controls, and first-degree relatives.  Familial risk for schizophrenia may be associated with qualitatively similar but  quantitatively milder abnormalities in visual episodic memory retrieval but not for encoding in the prefrontal cortex and thalamus.
22992490	16	n = 16
22992490	28	n = 28
23029097	20	n = 20	INTRODUCTION: While numerous studies have documented evidence for plasticity of the human brain there is little evidence that the human spinal cord can change after injury. Here, we employ a novel spinal fMRI design where we stimulate normal and abnormal sensory dermatomes in persons with traumatic spinal cord injury and perform a connectivity analysis to understand how spinal networks process information. METHODS: Spinal fMRI data was collected at 3 Tesla at two institutions from 38 individuals using the standard SEEP functional MR imaging techniques. Thermal stimulation was applied to four dermatomes in an interleaved  timing pattern during each fMRI acquisition. SCI patients were stimulated in dermatomes both above (normal sensation) and below the level of their injury. Sub-group analysis was performed on healthy controls (n = 20), complete SCI (n =  3), incomplete SCI (n = 9) and SCI patients who recovered full function (n = 6).  RESULTS: Patients with chronic incomplete SCI, when stimulated in a dermatome of  normal sensation, showed an increased number of active voxels relative to controls (p = 0.025). There was an inverse relationship between the degree of sensory impairment and the number of active voxels in the region of the spinal cord corresponding to that dermatome of abnormal sensation (R(2) = 0.93, p<0.001). Lastly, a connectivity analysis demonstrated a significantly increased  number of intraspinal connections in incomplete SCI patients relative to controls suggesting altered processing of afferent sensory signals. CONCLUSIONS: In this work we demonstrate the use of spinal fMRI to investigate changes in spinal processing of somatosensory information in the human spinal cord. We provide evidence for plasticity of the human spinal cord after traumatic injury based on  an increase in the average number of active voxels in dermatomes of normal sensation in chronic SCI patients and an increased number of intraspinal connections in incomplete SCI patients relative to healthy controls.
23029097	3	n = 3
23029097	9	n = 9
23029097	6	n = 6
23033058	57	n = 57	The timing and developmental factors underlying the establishment of language dominance are poorly understood. We investigated the degree of lateralization of  traditional frontotemporal and modulatory prefrontal-cerebellar regions of the distributed language network in children (n = 57) ages 4 to 12--a critical period for language consolidation. We examined the relationship between the strength of  language lateralization and neuropsychological measures and task performance. The fundamental language network is established by four with ongoing maturation of language functions as evidenced by strengthening of lateralization in the traditional frontotemporal language regions; temporal regions were strongly and consistently lateralized by age seven, while frontal regions had greater variability and were less strongly lateralized through age 10. In contrast, the modulatory prefrontal-cerebellar regions were the least strongly lateralized and  degree of lateralization was not associated with age. Stronger core language skills were significantly correlated with greater right lateralization in the cerebellum.
23034517	67	n = 67	It is not known how 5-HTTLPR genotype x childhood adversity (CA) interactions that are associated with an increased risk for affective disorders in population  studies operate at the neural systems level. We hypothesized that healthy adolescents at increased genetic and environmental risk for developing mood disorders (depression and anxiety) would demonstrate increased amygdala reactivity to emotional stimuli compared to those with only one such risk factor  or those with none. Participants (n=67) were classified into one of 4 groups dependent on being homozygous for the long or short alleles within the serotonin-transporter-linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) of the SLC6A4 gene and exposure to CA in the first 11 years of life (present or absent). A functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation was undertaken which involved viewing emotionally-salient face stimuli. In addition, we assessed the role of other variables hypothesized to influence amygdala reactivity, namely recent negative life-events (RNLE) assessed at ages 14 and 17, current anxiety symptoms and psychiatric history. We replicated prior findings demonstrating moderation by gene variants in 5-HTTLPR, but found no support for an effect of CA on amygdala reactivity. We also found a significant effect of RNLE aged 17 with amygdala reactivity demonstrating additive, but not interactive effects with 5-HTTLPR. A whole-brain analysis found a 5-HTTLPRxCA interaction in the lingual gyrus whereby CA appears to differentially modify neural reactivity depending on genotype. These results demonstrate that two different forms of environmental adversities interplay with 5-HTTLPR and thereby differentially impact amygdala and cortical reactivity.
23051901	14	n = 14	In this study, a functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigm originally employed by Takahashi et al. was adapted to look for emotion-specific differences in functional brain activity within a healthy German sample (N = 14), using shame- and guilt-related stimuli and neutral stimuli. Activations were found for  both of these emotions in the temporal lobe (shame condition: anterior cingulate  cortex, parahippocampal gyrus; guilt condition: fusiform gyrus, middle temporal gyrus). Specific activations were found for shame in the frontal lobe (medial and inferior frontal gyrus), and for guilt in the amygdala and insula. This is consistent with Takahashi et al.'s results obtained for a Japanese sample (using  Japanese stimuli), which showed activations in the fusiform gyrus, hippocampus, middle occipital gyrus and parahippocampal gyrus. During the imagination of shame, frontal and temporal areas (e.g. middle frontal gyrus and parahippocampal  gyrus) were responsive regardless of gender. In the guilt condition, women only activate temporal regions, whereas men showed additional frontal and occipital activation as well as a responsive amygdala. The results suggest that shame and guilt share some neural networks, as well as having individual areas of activation. It can be concluded that frontal, temporal and limbic areas play a prominent role in the generation of moral feelings.
23055092	64	n = 64	Although hippocampal atrophy and altered functional brain responses to emotional  stimuli have been found in major depressive disorder (MDD), the relationship between the two is not yet well understood. The present study focused on children with and without a history of preschool onset MDD (PO-MDD) and directly examined  the relations between hippocampal volume and functional brain activation to affect-eliciting stimuli. Children completed annual diagnostic assessments starting at preschool. When children were school-aged, high-resolution structural MRI and task-related functional MRI data were acquired from N = 64 nonmedicated children. During fMRI, subjects were shown emotional faces. Results from the total sample indicated that smaller bilateral hippocampal volumes were associated with greater cortico-limbic (e.g., amygdala, hippocampus, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) activation to sad or negative faces versus neutral faces. Left hippocampal volume was negatively associated with the cortico-limbic activation in both the PO-MDD and healthy children. Right hippocampal volume was negatively  correlated with amygdala responses in the PO-MDD group, but not in the healthy comparison group. These findings suggest that there may be important interrelationships between reduced hippocampal volume and hyperactivation of brain responses in children, both those with and those without a history of PO-MDD.
23056309	22	n = 22	BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder (MDD) is associated with a mood-congruent processing bias in the amygdala toward face stimuli portraying sad expressions that is evident even when such stimuli are presented below the level of conscious awareness. The extended functional anatomical network that maintains this response bias has not been established, however. AIMS: To identify neural network differences in the hemodynamic response to implicitly presented facial expressions between depressed and healthy control participants. METHOD: Unmedicated-depressed participants with MDD (n=22) and healthy controls (HC; n=25) underwent functional MRI as they viewed face stimuli showing sad, happy or  neutral face expressions, presented using a backward masking design. The blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signal was measured to identify regions where the hemodynamic response to the emotionally valenced stimuli differed between groups. RESULTS: The MDD subjects showed greater BOLD responses than the controls to masked-sad versus masked-happy faces in the hippocampus, amygdala and anterior inferotemporal cortex. While viewing both masked-sad and masked-happy faces relative to masked-neutral faces, the depressed subjects showed greater hemodynamic responses than the controls in a network that included the medial and orbital prefrontal cortices and anterior temporal cortex. CONCLUSIONS: Depressed  and healthy participants showed distinct hemodynamic responses to masked-sad and  masked-happy faces in neural circuits known to support the processing of emotionally valenced stimuli and to integrate the sensory and visceromotor aspects of emotional behavior. Altered function within these networks in MDD may  establish and maintain illness-associated differences in the salience of sensory/social stimuli, such that attention is biased toward negative and away from positive stimuli.
23056309	25	n = 25
23107380	20	n = 20	Despite considerable recent interest, the biological basis and clinical diagnosis of behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) pose unresolved problems.  Mentalising (the cognitive capacity to interpret the behaviour of oneself and others in terms of mental states) is impaired as a prominent feature of bvFTD, consistent with involvement of brain regions including ventro-medial prefrontal cortex (PFC), orbitofrontal cortex and anterior temporal lobes. Here, we investigated mentalising ability in a cohort of patients with bvFTD using a novel modality: music. We constructed a novel neuropsychological battery requiring attribution of affective mental or non-mental associations to musical stimuli. Mentalising performance of patients with bvFTD (n = 20) was assessed in relation  to matched healthy control subjects (n = 20); patients also had a comprehensive assessment of behaviour and general neuropsychological functions. Neuroanatomical correlates of performance on the experimental tasks were investigated using voxel-based morphometry of patients' brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. Compared to healthy control subjects, patients showed impaired ability to  attribute mental states but not non-mental characteristics to music, and this deficit correlated with performance on a standard test of social inference and with carer ratings of patients' empathic capacity, but not with other potentially relevant measures of general neuropsychological function. Mentalising performance in the bvFTD group was associated with grey matter changes in anterior temporal lobe and ventro-medial PFC. These findings suggest that music can represent surrogate mental states and the ability to construct such mental representations  is impaired in bvFTD, with potential implications for our understanding of the biology of bvFTD and human social cognition more broadly.
23107380	20	n = 20
23108278	97	n = 97	Multimodal fusion is an effective approach to better understand brain diseases. However, most such instances have been limited to pair-wise fusion; because there are often more than two imaging modalities available per subject, there is a need for approaches that can combine multiple datasets optimally. In this paper, we extended our previous two-way fusion model called "multimodal CCA+joint ICA", to  three or N-way fusion, that enables robust identification of correspondence among N data types and allows one to investigate the important question of whether certain disease risk factors are shared or distinct across multiple modalities. We compared "mCCA+jICA" with its alternatives in a 3-way fusion simulation and verified its advantages in both decomposition accuracy and modal linkage detection. We also applied it to real functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)-Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and structural MRI fusion to elucidate the  abnormal architecture underlying schizophrenia (n=97) relative to healthy controls (n=116). Both modality-common and modality-unique abnormal regions were  identified in schizophrenia. Specifically, the visual cortex in fMRI, the anterior thalamic radiation (ATR) and forceps minor in DTI, and the parietal lobule, cuneus and thalamus in sMRI were linked and discriminated between patients and controls. One fMRI component with regions of activity in motor cortex and superior temporal gyrus individually discriminated schizophrenia from  controls. Finally, three components showed significant correlation with duration  of illness (DOI), suggesting that lower gray matter volumes in parietal, frontal, and temporal lobes and cerebellum are associated with increased DOI, along with white matter disruption in ATR and cortico-spinal tracts. Findings suggest that the identified fractional anisotropy changes may relate to the corresponding functional/structural changes in the brain that are thought to play a role in the clinical expression of schizophrenia. The proposed "mCCA+jICA" method showed promise for elucidating the joint or coupled neuronal abnormalities underlying mental illnesses and improves our understanding of the disease process.
23108278	116	n = 116
23108370	54	n = 54	Adolescence is a transition period that is assumed to be characterized by increased sensitivity to reward. While there is growing research on reward processing in adolescents, investigations into the engagement of brain regions under different reward-related conditions in one sample of healthy adolescents, especially in a target age group, are missing. We aimed to identify brain regions preferentially activated in a reaction time task (monetary incentive delay (MID)  task) and a simple guessing task (SGT) in a sample of 14-year-old adolescents (N  = 54) using two commonly used reward paradigms. Functional magnetic resonance imaging was employed during the MID with big versus small versus no win conditions and the SGT with big versus small win and big versus small loss conditions. Analyses focused on changes in blood oxygen level-dependent contrasts during reward and punishment processing in anticipation and feedback phases. We found clear magnitude-sensitive response in reward-related brain regions such as  the ventral striatum during anticipation in the MID task, but not in the SGT. This was also true for reaction times. The feedback phase showed clear reward-related, but magnitude-independent, response patterns, for example in the  anterior cingulate cortex, in both tasks. Our findings highlight neural and behavioral response patterns engaged in two different reward paradigms in one sample of 14-year-old healthy adolescents and might be important for reference in future studies investigating reward and punishment processing in a target age group.
23125121	81	n = 81	Loss in insight is a major feature of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) but has been  investigated relatively little. More importantly, the neural basis of insight loss is still poorly understood. The current study investigated insight deficit profiles across a large cohort of neurodegenerative patients (n = 81), including  FTD and Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. We employed a novel insight questionnaire, which tapped into changes across different domains: social interaction, emotion, diagnosis/treatment, language, and motivation. FTD subtypes varied considerably for insight loss, with the behavioral variant worst and the progressive non-fluent variant least affected. All other subtypes and AD showed milder but consistent insight loss. Voxel-based morphometry analysis revealed that overall insight loss correlated with ventromedial and frontopolar prefrontal atrophy, with exception of social interaction and emotion insight loss, which additionally correlated with lateral temporal and amygdala atrophy, respectively. Our results show that patients with neurodegenerative conditions show variable loss of insight, with ventromedial and frontopolar cortex regions appearing to be particularly important for insight.
23131612	44	n = 44	Altered attention to alcohol-related cues is implicated in the craving and relapse cycle characteristic of alcohol dependence (ALC). Prior cue reactivity studies typically invoke explicit attention to alcohol cues, so the neural response underlying incidental cue exposure remains unclear. Here, we embed infrequent, task-irrelevant alcohol and non-alcohol cues in an attention-demanding task, enabling evaluation of brain responses to distracting alcohol cues. Alcohol dependent individuals, across illness phase (n=44), and controls (n=20) performed a cue-reactivity fMRI target detection task. Significant Group-by-Distractor effects were observed in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), inferior parietal lobule, and amygdala. Controls and long-term abstainers increased recruitment of attention and cognitive control regions, while recent and long-term abstainers decreased limbic recruitment to alcohol distractors. Across phases of ALC, self-reported craving positively correlated with cue-related activations in ventral ACC, medial prefrontal cortex, and cerebellum. Results indicate that brain responses elicited by incidental alcohol cues differentiate phases of ALC.
23131612	20	n = 20
23137805	14	n = 14	Nicotine can have beneficial effects on attention performance and corresponding brain function in both schizophrenia patients and healthy controls, but it remains controversial whether nicotine affects brain function differentially in patients vs. controls. The effects of nicotine on brain activity elicited by attention-requiring oddball-type tasks have not been studied in schizophrenia patients. In this study we sought to investigate the impact of nicotine on the p300 evoked potential component and corresponding fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) activation measures in schizophrenia patients and controls. Applying a double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over design, the effects of 1mg nasal nicotine on brain activity elicited by a visual oddball-type task in N=14 schizophrenia and N=15 control smokers were studied with simultaneous EEG-fMRI. EEG single trial amplitudes were used to inform the fMRI analysis. We found a nicotine-associated increase in P300-informed fMRI activation in schizophrenia patients and controls, mainly in the anterior cingulate and adjacent medial frontal cortex. No group differences in the response to nicotine were found. Remarkably, averaged EEG and fMRI activation measures considered in isolation were largely unaffected by nicotine. Taken together, the effects of nicotine on P300 amplitude-associated brain activation do not seem to be fundamentally different in schizophrenic smokers and healthy controls.
23137805	15	n = 15
23139910	12	n = 12	Attentional dysfunction is among the most consistent observations of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). However, the neural nature of this deficit in ASD is still unclear. In this study, we aimed to identify the neurobehavioral correlates of attentional dysfunction in ASD. We used the Attention Network Test-Revised and functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine alerting, orienting, and executive control functions, as well as the neural substrates underlying these attentional functions in unmedicated, high-functioning adults with ASD (n = 12) and matched healthy controls (HC, n = 12). Compared with HC, individuals with ASD showed increased error rates in alerting and executive control, accompanied by lower activity in the mid-frontal gyrus and the caudate nucleus for alerting, and by the absence of significant functional activation in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) for executive control. In addition, greater behavioral deficiency in executive control in ASD was correlated with less functional activation of the ACC. These findings of behavioral and neural abnormalities in alerting and executive control of attention in ASD may suggest core attentional deficits, which require further investigation.
23139910	12	n = 12
23155380	10	n = 10	OBJECTIVE: Gray matter loss in the limbic structures was found in recent onset post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) patients. In the present study, we measured regional gray matter volume in trauma survivors to verify the hypothesis that stress may cause different regional gray matter loss in trauma survivors with and without recent onset PTSD. METHOD: High resolution T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were obtained from coal mine flood disaster survivors with (n = 10) and without (n = 10) recent onset PTSD and 20 no trauma exposed normal controls.  The voxel-based morphometry (VBM) method was used to measure the regional gray matter volume in three groups, the correlations of PTSD symptom severities with the gray matter volume in trauma survivors were also analyzed by multiple regression. RESULTS: Compared with normal controls, recent onset PTSD patients had smaller gray matter volume in left dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and non PTSD subjects had smaller gray matter volume in the right pulvinar and left pallidum. The gray matter volume of the trauma survivors correlated negatively with CAPS scores in the right frontal lobe, left anterior and middle cingulate cortex, bilateral cuneus cortex, right middle occipital lobe, while in  the recent onset PTSD, the gray matter volume correlated negatively with CAPS scores in bilateral superior medial frontal lobe and right ACC. CONCLUSION: The present study identified gray matter loss in different regions in recent onset PTSD and non PTSD after a single prolonged trauma exposure. The gray matter volume of left dorsal ACC associated with the development of PTSD, while the gray matter volume of right pulvinar and left pallidum associated with the response to the severe stress. The atrophy of the frontal and limbic cortices predicts the symptom severities of the PTSD.
23155380	10	n = 10
23158778	15	n = 15	Impairment in decision-making is frequently observed in suicide attempters. Little is known, however, about neural circuitry underlying decision-making in adolescent attempters. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to assess decision-making and learning-related neural activity during Iowa Gambling  Task (IGT) performance in adolescents with depression and suicide attempt (ATT, n=15), non-attempters with depression (NAT, n=14), and healthy controls (HC, n=13). ATT performed best on the IGT. A three group by two condition (high-risk versus low-risk) by three IGT block (each of 20 cards) whole-brain analysis (p<0.05, corrected) interaction was found in the left hippocampal, frontal and temporal cortical, striatal and thalamic regions. Post-hoc analyses revealed that during low-risk decisions in blocks 2 and 3, NAT, but not ATT, showed greater left hippocampal activation versus HC (p=0.0004, p=0.003); in block 2, during low-risk decisions NAT showed greater left middle temporal gyral activation versus HC (p=0.003); in block 3, during high-risk decisions ATT showed less activation in the right thalamus versus NAT (p=0.001) and during low risk decisions ATT showed greater activation than HC in the left caudate (p=0.002). NAT, but not ATT are differentiated from HC during performance of the IGT. Functional abnormalities in neural circuitry implicated in learning in the context of risk may underlie risk for MDD, but not risk for suicide attempt, in adolescence.
23158778	14	n = 14
23158778	13	n = 13
23160910	16	n = 16	While several studies have investigated interactions between the electroencephalography (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging BOLD signal fluctuations, less is known about the associations between EEG oscillations and baseline brain haemodynamics, and few studies have examined the  link between EEG power outside the alpha band and baseline perfusion. Here we compare whole-brain arterial spin labelling perfusion MRI and EEG in a group of healthy adults (n = 16, ten females, median age: 27 years, range 21-48) during an eyes closed rest condition. Correlations emerged between perfusion and global average EEG power in low (delta: 2-4 Hz and theta: 4-7 Hz), middle (alpha: 8-13 Hz), and high (beta: 13-30 Hz and gamma: 30-45 Hz) frequency bands in both cortical and sub-cortical regions. The correlations were predominately positive in middle and high-frequency bands, and negative in delta. In addition, central alpha frequency positively correlated with perfusion in a network of brain regions associated with the modulation of attention and preparedness for external input, and central theta frequency correlated negatively with a widespread network of cortical regions. These results indicate that the coupling between average EEG power/frequency and local cerebral blood flow varies in a frequency specific manner. Our results are consistent with longstanding concepts that decreasing EEG frequencies which in general map onto decreasing levels of activation.
23183711	22	n = 22	Drugs that alter dopamine transmission have opposite effects on reward and punishment learning. These opposite effects have been suggested to depend on dopamine in the striatum. Here, we establish for the first time the neurochemical specificity of such drug effects, during reward and punishment learning in humans, by adopting a coadministration design. Participants (N = 22) were scanned on 4 occasions using functional magnetic resonance imaging, following intake of placebo, bromocriptine (dopamine-receptor agonist), sulpiride (dopamine-receptor  antagonist), or a combination of both drugs. A reversal-learning task was employed, in which both unexpected rewards and punishments signaled reversals. Drug effects were stratified with baseline working memory to take into account individual variations in drug response. Sulpiride induced parallel span-dependent changes on striatal blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal during unexpected  rewards and punishments. These drug effects were found to be partially dopamine-dependent, as they were blocked by coadministration with bromocriptine.  In contrast, sulpiride elicited opposite effects on behavioral measures of reward and punishment learning. Moreover, sulpiride-induced increases in striatal BOLD signal during both outcomes were associated with behavioral improvement in reward versus punishment learning. These results provide a strong support for current theories, suggesting that drug effects on reward and punishment learning are mediated via striatal dopamine.
23200527	74	n = 74	BACKGROUND: Functional neuroimaging studies have provided consistent support for  the idea that obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is associated with disturbances of brain corticostriatal systems. However, in general, these studies have not sought to account for the disorder's prominent clinical heterogeneity. METHODS: To address these concerns, we investigated the influence of major OCD symptom dimensions on brain corticostriatal functional systems in a large sample of OCD patients (n = 74) and control participants (n = 74) examined with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging. We employed a valid method for mapping ventral and dorsal striatal functional connectivity, which supported both standard group comparisons and linear regression analyses with patients' scores on the Dimensional Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale. RESULTS: Consistent with past findings, patients demonstrated a common connectivity alteration involving the ventral striatum and orbitofrontal cortex that predicted overall illness severity levels. This common alteration was independent of the effect of  particular symptom dimensions. Instead, we observed distinct anatomical relationships between the severity of symptom dimensions and striatal functional  connectivity. Aggression symptoms modulated connectivity between the ventral striatum, amygdala, and ventromedial frontal cortex, while sexual/religious symptoms had a specific influence on ventral striatal-insular connectivity. Hoarding modulated the strength of ventral and dorsal striatal connectivity with  distributed frontal regions. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results suggest that pathophysiological changes among orbitofrontal-striatal regions may be common to all forms of OCD. They suggest that a further examination of certain dimensional relationships will also be relevant for advancing current neurobiological models of the disorder.
23200527	74	n = 74
23201365	34	n = 34	Dietary restraint theoretically increases risk for binge eating, but prospective  and experimental studies have produced contradictory findings, apparently because dietary restraint scales do not identify individuals who are reducing caloric intake. Yet, experimentally manipulated caloric deprivation increases responsivity of brain regions implicated in attention and reward to food images,  which may contribute to binge eating. We tested whether self-imposed acute and longer-term caloric restriction increases responsivity of attention and reward regions to images, anticipated receipt, and receipt of palatable food using functional magnetic resonance imaging among female and male adolescents (Study 1  n=34; Study 2 n=51/81). Duration of acute caloric deprivation correlated positively with activation in regions implicated in attention, reward, and motivation in response to images, anticipated receipt, and receipt of palatable food (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, putamen, and precentral gyrus respectively). Youth in a longer-term negative energy balance likewise showed greater activation in attention (anterior cingulate cortex, ventral medial prefrontal cortex), visual processing (superior visual cortex), reward (caudate) and memory (hippocampus) regions in response to receipt and anticipated receipt of palatable food relative to those in neutral or positive energy balance. Results confirm that self-imposed caloric deprivation increases responsivity of attention, reward, and motivation regions to food, which may explain why caloric deprivation weight loss diets typically do not produce lasting weight loss.
23201365	51	n = 51
23211992	31	n = 31	Biological motion detection is both commonplace and important, but there is great inter-individual variability in this ability, the neural basis of which is currently unknown. Here we examined whether the behavioral variability in biological motion detection is reflected in brain anatomy. Perceptual thresholds  for detection of biological motion and control conditions (non-biological object  motion detection and motion coherence) were determined in a group of healthy human adults (n=31) together with structural magnetic resonance images of the brain. Voxel based morphometry analyzes revealed that gray matter volumes of left posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) and left ventral premotor cortex (vPMC) significantly predicted individual differences in biological motion detection, but showed no significant relationship with performance on the control tasks. Our study reveals a neural basis associated with the inter-individual variability in  biological motion detection, reliably linking the neuroanatomical structure of left pSTS and vPMC with biological motion detection performance.
23223206	16	n = 16	Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) and social anxiety disorder (SAD) are both characterized by social dysfunction, but no study to date has compared neural responses to social rewards in ASDs and SAD. Neural responses during social and non-social reward anticipation and outcomes were examined in individuals with ASD (n = 16), SAD (n = 15) and a control group (n = 19) via functional magnetic resonance imaging. Analyses modeling all three groups revealed increased nucleus  accumbens (NAc) activation in SAD relative to ASD during monetary reward anticipation, whereas both the SAD and ASD group demonstrated decreased bilateral NAc activation relative to the control group during social reward anticipation. During reward outcomes, the SAD group did not differ significantly from the other two groups in ventromedial prefrontal cortex activation to either reward type. Analyses comparing only the ASD and SAD groups revealed greater bilateral amygdala activation to social rewards in SAD relative to ASD during both anticipation and outcome phases, and the magnitude of left amygdala hyperactivation in the SAD group during social reward anticipation was significantly correlated with the severity of trait anxiety symptoms. Results suggest reward network dysfunction to both monetary and social rewards in SAD and ASD during reward anticipation and outcomes, but that NAc hypoactivation during monetary reward anticipation differentiates ASD from SAD.
23223206	15	n = 15
23223206	19	n = 19
23236200	28	n = 28	Cerebral blood flow (CBF) provides an indication of the metabolic status of the cortex and may have utility in elucidating preclinical brain changes in persons at risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related diseases. In this study, we investigated CBF in 327 well-characterized adults including patients with AD (n = 28), patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI, n = 23), older cognitively normal (OCN, n = 24) adults, and asymptomatic middle-aged adults (n = 252) with and without a family history (FH) of AD. Compared with the asymptomatic cohort, AD patients displayed significant hypoperfusion in the precuneus, posterior cingulate, lateral parietal cortex, and the hippocampal region. Patients with aMCI exhibited a similar but less marked pattern of hypoperfusion.  Perfusion deficits within the OCN adults were primarily localized to the inferior parietal lobules. Asymptomatic participants with a maternal FH of AD showed hypoperfusion in hippocampal and parietofrontal regions compared with those without a FH of AD or those with only a paternal FH of AD. These observations persisted when gray matter volume was included as a voxel-wise covariate. Our findings suggest that having a mother with AD might confer a particular risk for  AD-related cerebral hypoperfusion in midlife. In addition, they provide further support for the potential utility of arterial spin labeling for the measurement of AD-related neurometabolic dysfunction, particularly in situations where [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose imaging is infeasible or clinically contraindicated.
23236200	23	n = 23
23236200	24	n = 24
23236200	252	n = 252
23236383	10	n = 10	Close proximity to an attachment figure, such as a caregiver, has been shown to attenuate threat-related activity in limbic regions such as the hypothalamus in healthy individuals. We hypothesized that such features might be similarly attenuated by proximity during a potentially stressful situation in a clinically  anxious population of youths. Confirmation of this hypothesis could support the role of attachment figures in the management of anxiety among children and adolescents. Three groups were analyzed: anxious children and adolescents who requested that their caregiver accompany them in the scanner room, anxious children and adolescents without their caregiver in the scanner room and healthy  controls (each of N = 10). The groups were matched for age and, among the two anxious groups, for diagnosis (mean age 9.5). The children and adolescents were exposed to physical threat words during an fMRI assessment. Results indicate that activity in the hypothalamus, ventromedial, and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex were significantly reduced in anxious children and adolescents who requested that their caregiver accompany them in the scanner room compared to those without their caregiver in the scanner room. Mean activity in these regions in anxious children and adolescents with their caregiver in the scanner room was comparable  to that of healthy controls. These data suggest links between social contact and  neural mechanisms of emotional reactivity; specifically, presence of caregivers moderates the increase in anxiety seen with stressful stimuli. Capitalizing on the ability of anxious youths to manifest low levels of anxiety-like information  processing in the presence of a caregiver could help in modeling adaptive function in behavioral treatments.
23239964	43	n = 43	Although Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) was initially regarded as a disorder exclusive to childhood, nowadays its prevalence in adulthood is well established. The development of novel techniques for quantifying the thickness of the cerebral mantle allows the further exploration of the neuroanatomical profiles underlying the child and adult form of the disorder. To  examine the cortical mantle in children and adults with ADHD, we applied a vertex-wise analysis of cortical thickness to anatomical brain MRI scans acquired from children with (n = 43) and without ADHD (n = 41), as well as a group of adult neurotypical individuals (n = 31), adult patients with a history of stimulant treatment (n = 31) and medication-naive adults with ADHD (n = 24). We observed several clusters of reduced laminar cortical thickness in ADHD patients  in comparison to neurotypical individuals. These differences were primarily located in the dorsal attention network, including the bilateral inferior and superior parietal cortex and a section of the frontal cortex (centered on the superior frontal and precentral gyrus bilaterally). Further laminar thickness deficits were observed in the bilateral orbitofrontal cortex and medial occipital cortex. The deficits in the cortical surface were especially pronounced in the child sample, while adult patients showed a more typical laminar thickness across the cerebral mantle. These findings show that the neuroanatomical profile of ADHD, especially the childhood form of the disorder, involves robust alterations  in the cortical mantle, which are most prominent in brain regions subserving attentional processing.
23239964	41	n = 41
23239964	31	n = 31
23239964	31	n = 31
23239964	24	n = 24
23242198	203	n = 203	Dopaminergic (DArgic) pathways play crucial roles in brain function and their disruption is implicated in various neuropsychiatric diseases. Here, we demonstrate in 402 healthy children/adolescents (12 +/- 3 years) and 704 healthy  young adults (23 +/- 5 years) that the functional connectivity of DA pathways matures significantly from childhood to adulthood and is different for healthy children and children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; N = 203; 12 +/- 3 years). This transition is characterized by age-related increases in the functional connectivity of the ventral tegmental area (VTA) with limbic regions and with the default mode network and by decreases in the connectivity of the substantia nigra (SN) with motor and medial temporal cortices. The changes from a predominant influence of SN in childhood/adolescence to a combined influence of SN and VTA in young adulthood might explain the increased vulnerability to psychiatric disorders, such as ADHD, early in life. We also show that VTA and SN connectivity networks were highly reproducible, which highlights  their potential value as biomarkers for evaluating DArgic dysfunction in neuropsychiatric disorders.
23245760	21	n = 21	BACKGROUND: Binge eating is associated with obesity and has been conceptualized as "food addiction." However, this view has received only inconsistent support in humans, and limited evidence relates key neurocircuitry to the disorder. Moreover, relatively few studies have used pharmacologic functional magnetic resonance imaging to probe the underlying basis of altered eating behaviors. METHODS: In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group study, we explored the effects of a potent mu-opioid receptor antagonist, GSK1521498, in obese individuals with moderate binge eating. Subjects were tested during a baseline placebo run-in period and retested after 28-days of drug (n = 21) or placebo (n = 21) treatment. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging and behavioral measures, we determined the drug's effects on brain responses to food images and, separately, on motivation to expend energy to view comparable images. RESULTS: Compared with placebo, GSK1521498 was associated with a significant reduction in  pallidum/putamen responses to pictures of high-calorie food and a reduction in motivation to view images of high-calorie food. Intriguingly, although motivational responding was reduced, subjective liking for the same images actually increased following drug treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Stimulus-specific putamen/pallidal responses in obese people with binge eating are sensitive to altered mu-opioid function. This neuromodulation was accompanied by reductions in motivational responding, as measured by grip force, although subjective liking responses to the same stimuli actually increased. As well as providing evidence for a link between the opioid system and food-related behavior in binge-eating obese individuals, these results support a dissociation across measures of motivation and liking associated with food-related stimuli in these individuals.
23245760	21	n = 21
23261134	65	n = 65	BACKGROUND: In response to emotional faces, patients with adolescent bipolar disorder (ABD) exhibit increased neural activity in subcortical emotional processing regions (e.g., amygdala, ventral striatum) and variable prefrontal activity. We extend previous research by identifying cortical and subcortical regions showing altered hemodynamic response shapes in ABD relative to healthy controls (HC). METHODS: ABD (N=65) and matched HC (N=79) completed a slow event-related affective hemodynamic probe task that required indicating the gender of fearful and neutral faces. An informed basis set in SPM8 evaluated shape variations of the hemodynamic responses to these faces. RESULTS: Patients with ABD showed higher activity for fearful relative to neutral faces in the amygdala and prefrontal cortex and a delayed hemodynamic response to fearful faces in dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices (PFC), as well as bilateral amygdala and caudate. Furthermore, the ABD group, relative to HC, showed a prolonged response to fearful faces in right dorsolateral PFC. Clinical  measures of mania and depression severity correlated with increased processing delays in the amygdala and striatum. LIMITATIONS: By design, the task contained fewer, more widely-spaced stimuli, possibly reducing its power to detect group differences. The use of fearful faces makes comparisons with prior literature in  ABD somewhat more difficult. CONCLUSIONS: The ABD group engaged in enhanced neural processing of the fearful faces which was associated with increasingly severe manic/mixed mood states. These exploratory findings could help elucidate a "biosignature" of emotion-attention interactions in ABD and present a potential target for reversal with medication treatment.
23261134	79	n = 79
23287311	27	n = 27	BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a heterogeneous disorder that may consist of multiple etiologies and disease processes. Auditory hallucinations (AH), which are common and often disabling, represent a narrower and more basic dimension of  psychosis than schizophrenia. Previous studies suggest that abnormal primary auditory cortex activity is associated with AH pathogenesis. We thus investigated functional connectivity, using a seed in primary auditory cortex, in schizophrenia patients with and without AH and healthy controls, to examine neural circuit abnormalities associated more specifically with AH than the myriad other symptoms that comprise schizophrenia. METHODS: Using resting-state fMRI (rsfMRI), we investigated functional connectivity of the primary auditory cortex, located on Heschl's gyrus, in schizophrenia spectrum patients with AH. Participants were patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or schizophreniform disorder with lifetime AH (n=27); patients with the same diagnoses but no lifetime AH (n=14); and healthy controls (n=28). RESULTS: Patients with AH vulnerability showed increased left Heschl's gyrus functional connectivity with left frontoparietal regions and decreased functional connectivity with right hippocampal formation and mediodorsal thalamus compared to patients without lifetime AH. Furthermore, among AH patients, left Heschl's gyrus functional connectivity covaried positively with AH severity in left inferior frontal gyrus (Broca's area), left lateral STG, right pre- and postcentral gyri, cingulate cortex, and orbitofrontal cortex. There were no differences between patients with and without lifetime AH in right Heschl's gyrus seeded functional connectivity. CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal interactions between left Heschl's gyrus and regions involved in speech/language, memory, and the monitoring of self-generated events may contribute to AH vulnerability.
23287311	14	n = 14
23287311	28	n = 28
23297009	71	n = 71	Attributions are constantly assigned in everyday life. A well-known phenomenon is the self-serving bias: that is, people's tendency to attribute positive events to internal causes (themselves) and negative events to external causes (other persons/circumstances). Here, we investigated the neural correlates of the cognitive processes implicated in self-serving attributions using social situations that differed in their emotional saliences. We administered an attributional bias task during fMRI scanning in a large sample of healthy subjects (n = 71). Eighty sentences describing positive or negative social situations were presented, and subjects decided via buttonpress whether the situation had been caused by themselves or by the other person involved. Comparing positive with negative sentences revealed activations of the bilateral  posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). Self-attribution correlated with activation of  the posterior portion of the precuneus. However, self-attributed positive versus  negative sentences showed activation of the anterior portion of the precuneus, and self-attributed negative versus positive sentences demonstrated activation of the bilateral insular cortex. All significant activations were reported with a statistical threshold of p </= .001, uncorrected. In addition, a comparison of our fMRI task with data from the Internal, Personal and Situational Attributions  Questionnaire, Revised German Version, demonstrated convergent validity. Our findings suggest that the precuneus and the PCC are involved in the evaluation of social events with particular regional specificities: The PCC is activated during emotional evaluation, the posterior precuneus during attributional evaluation, and the anterior precuneus during self-serving processes. Furthermore, we assume  that insula activation is a correlate of awareness of personal agency in negative situations.
23314944	95	n = 95	Recent resting fMRI studies have suggested that the functional connectivity of the brain's large-scale networks is associated with the cognitive decline of aging and is modulated by genetic factors. Our previous study found a significant association between interleukin-1 (IL-1 beta) C-511T polymorphism and working memory performance among elderly people. This study investigates the effects of IL-1 beta C-511T polymorphism on the functional connectivity of the cognitive division of the cingulate cortex [i.e., the anterior midcingulate (aMCC)] in non-demented Han elderly people and tests the hypothesis that T/T carriers are associated with lowered FC. Non-demented elderly males (n = 95) received resting  MRI scanning, genotyping, and cognitive evaluation using the cognitive abilities  screening instrument (CASI) and the Wechsler digit span task test. The functional connectivity map in each subject was derived based on positive correlations of low-frequency fMRI fluctuations with a seed in the aMCC according to structural definition. Between-group difference was compared by random effect analysis. Compared to the C/C or C/T carriers, the T/T carriers had a significantly worse CASI performance, especially in the abstraction scores. For the functional connectivity analysis, the T/T carriers exhibited significantly lower functional  connectivity with several prefrontal areas and the left putamen. The cortico-striatal connection between the aMCC and left putamen was correlated with the CASI abstraction and attention scores. The results were consistent with our hypothesis and supported that the brains' functional connectivity in elderly people may be modulated by genetic polymorphism associated with local inflammation processes.
23318128	64	n = 64	Neuroimaging studies have revealed partially shared neural substrates for both the actual experience of pain and empathy elicited by the pain of others. We examined whether prior pain exposure increased neural activity in the anterior midcingulate cortex (aMCC) and bilateral anterior insula (AI) as a correlate of empathy for pain. Participants (N=64: 32 women, 32 men) viewed pictures displaying exposure to pressure pain (pain pictures) and pictures without any cue of pain (neutral pictures). Prior to the experiment, half of the participants were exposed to the same pain stimulus as the one seen in the pain pictures (pain exposure condition); the other half had no such experience (touch exposure condition). A balanced sex ratio was kept, to investigate possible sex differences. In the region-of-interest analyses, participants of the pain exposure condition showed decreased activity in the right AI and the aMCC relative to participants of the touch exposure condition. While in men, no differences were found in relation to their exposure condition, women with pain exposure showed decreased activity in the aMCC and additionally, in bilateral AI. Based on the entire sample, whole brain analyses revealed stronger activation in  the retrosplenial cortex, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, and medial prefrontal cortex in the pain exposure condition. In conclusion, prior pain exposure did not increase, but decreased activity in regions regularly associated with empathy for pain. However, pain experience increased activity in regions associated with memory retrieval, perspective taking, and top-down emotion regulation, which might facilitate empathizing with others.
23328446	14	n = 14	Social anxiety disorder (SAD) has been associated with aberrant processing of socio-emotional stimuli and failure to adaptively regulate emotion, corroborated  by functional neuroimaging studies. However, only a few studies of structural brain abnormalities in SAD have been reported, and among these only one investigated cortical thickness. In the present study we used magnetic resonance  imaging (MRI) in conjunction with an automated method to measure cortical thickness in patients with SAD (n=14) and healthy controls (n=12). Results showed significantly increased thickness of the left inferior temporal cortex in SAD patients relative to controls. Within the patient group, a negative association was found between social anxiety symptom severity and thickness of the right rostral anterior cingulate cortex. The observed alterations in brain structure may help explain previous findings of dysfunctional regulation and processing of  emotion in SAD.
23328446	12	n = 12
23333668	4	n = 4	Recent brain imaging investigations of developmental stuttering show considerable disagreement regarding which regions are related to stuttering. These divergent findings have been mainly derived from group studies. To investigate functional neurophysiology with improved precision, an individual-participant approach (N=4) using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging and test-retest reliability measures was performed while participants produced fluent and stuttered single words during two separate occasions. A parallel investigation required participants to imagine stuttering or not stuttering on single words. The overt and covert production tasks produced considerable within-subject agreement of activated voxels across occasions, but little within-subject agreement between overt and covert task activations. However, across-subject agreement for regions activated by the overt and covert tasks was minimal. These  results suggest that reliable effects of stuttering are participant-specific, an  implication that might correspond to individual differences in stuttering severity and functional compensation due to related structural abnormalities.
23335976	16	n = 16	It has been debated for several decades, whether number magnitudes are processed  global/holistically (whole number magnitudes) or in a local/decomposed fashion (digit magnitudes). However, while it has been suggested that men attend stronger to the global level, while women attend stronger to the local level, the question has never been studied with regards to sex differences. In two-digit number comparison men should engage a more holistic processing strategy, while women should engage a more decomposed strategy. To test this hypothesis, we employed number comparison stimuli of varying decade crossing and unit-decade compatibility in men (n = 16) and women (n = 16) during their early follicular and mid-luteal cycle phase. In within-decade (WD) items both numbers had the same decade digits. Non-WD items were unit-decade-compatible, if the smaller number contained the smaller unit-digit and incompatible otherwise. In incompatible items the two local features require different responses. Thus, processing of the local level should result in a compatibility effect in RT and recruitment of differential neural networks for compatible and incompatible items. The results support the view of a holistic strategy in men and a decomposed strategy in women. In men RT and BOLD-response did not differ for incompatible compared to compatible items. Women respond slower to incompatible compared to compatible items. They show a BOLD-response compatibility effect in regions of the default mode network during their follicular phase and in prefrontal areas involved in inhibitory control during their luteal phase. Furthermore, lateralization indices interacted with decade crossing and menstrual cycle phase in a way consistent with the hypothesis of progesterone-mediated interhemispheric decoupling.
23335976	16	n = 16
23348009	16	n = 16	BACKGROUND: The neurosteroid allopregnanolone is a potent allosteric modulator of the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor with anxiolytic properties. Exogenous administration of allopregnanolone reduces anxiety, and allopregnanolone blockade impairs social and affective functioning. However, the neural mechanism whereby allopregnanolone improves mood and reduces anxiety is unknown. In particular, brain imaging has not been used to link neurosteroid effects to emotion regulation neurocircuitry. METHODS: To investigate the brain basis of allopregnanolone's impact on emotion regulation, participants were administered 400 mg of pregnenolone (n=16) or placebo (n=15) and underwent 3T functional magnetic resonance imaging while performing the shifted-attention emotion appraisal task, which probes emotional processing and regulation. RESULTS: Compared with placebo, allopregnanolone was associated with reduced activity in the amygdala and insula across all conditions. During the appraisal condition, allopregnanolone increased activity in the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex and enhanced connectivity between the amygdala and dorsal medial prefrontal cortex, an effect that was associated with reduced self-reported anxiety. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that in response to emotional stimuli, allopregnanolone reduces activity in regions associated with generation of negative emotion. Furthermore, allopregnanolone may enhance activity in regions linked to regulatory processes. Aberrant activity in these regions has been linked to anxiety psychopathology. These results thus provide initial neuroimaging evidence that allopregnanolone may be a target for pharmacologic intervention in the treatment of anxiety disorders and suggest potential future directions for research into neurosteroid effects on emotion regulation neurocircuitry.
23348009	15	n = 15
23359269	21	n = 21	Individuals with significant hearing loss often fail to attain competency in reading orthographic scripts which encode the sound properties of spoken language. Nevertheless, some profoundly deaf individuals do learn to read at age-appropriate levels. The question of what differentiates proficient deaf readers from less-proficient readers is poorly understood but topical, as efforts to develop appropriate and effective interventions are needed. This study uses functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine brain activation in deaf  readers (N = 21), comparing proficient (N = 11) and less proficient (N = 10) readers' performance in a widely used test of implicit reading. Proficient deaf readers activated left inferior frontal gyrus and left middle and superior temporal gyrus in a pattern that is consistent with regions reported in hearing readers. In contrast, the less-proficient readers exhibited a pattern of response characterized by inferior and middle frontal lobe activation (right>left) which bears some similarity to areas reported in studies of logographic reading, raising the possibility that these individuals are using a qualitatively different mode of orthographic processing than is traditionally observed in hearing individuals reading sound-based scripts. The evaluation of proficient and less-proficient readers points to different modes of processing printed English words. Importantly, these preliminary findings allow us to begin to establish the impact of linguistic and educational factors on the neural systems that underlie  reading achievement in profoundly deaf individuals.
23359269	11	n = 11
23359269	10	n = 10
23378215	17	n = 17	Severe and persistent speech disorder, dysarthria, may be present for life after  brain injury in childhood, yet the neural correlates of this chronic disorder remain elusive. Although abundant literature is available on language reorganization after lesions in childhood, little is known about the capacity of  motor speech networks to reorganize after injury. Here, we examine the structural and functional neural correlates associated with chronic dysarthria after childhood-onset traumatic brain injury. Forty-nine participants aged 12 years 3 months to 24 years 11 months were recruited to the study: (i) a group with chronic dysarthria (n = 17); matched for age and sex with two control groups of (ii) healthy control subjects (n = 17); and (iii) individuals without dysarthria  after traumatic brain injury (n = 15). A high-resolution 3D T(1)-weighted whole-brain data set was acquired for voxel-based morphometry analyses of group differences in grey matter. Functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to localize activation associated with speaking single words (baseline: listening to words). Group differences on voxel-based morphometry revealed widespread grey matter reductions in the dysarthric group compared with healthy control subjects, including in numerous speech motor regions bilaterally, such as the cerebellum, the basal ganglia and primary motor cortex representation of the articulators. Relative to the non-dysarthric traumatic brain injury group, individuals with dysarthria showed reduced grey matter bilaterally in the ventral sensorimotor cortex, but this reduction was concomitant with increased functional activation only in the left-hemisphere cluster during speech. Finally, increased recruitment of Broca's area (Brodmann area 45, pars triangularis) but not its right homologue, correlated with better speech outcome, suggesting that this 'higher-level' area may be more critically involved with production when associated motor speech regions are damaged. We suggest that the bilateral morphological abnormalities within cortical speech networks in childhood prevented reorganization of speech function from the left- to right-hemisphere. Rather, functional reorganization involved over-recruitment of left-hemisphere motor regions, a reorganization method that was only partly relatively effective, given the presence of persisting yet mild speech deficits. The bilateral structural abnormalities found to limit functional reorganization here, may also  be critical to poor speech prognosis for populations with congenital, degenerative or acquired neurological disorders throughout the lifespan.
23378215	17	n = 17
23378215	15	n = 15
23395850	48	n = 48	Recent theoretical and empirical work has focused on the variability of network dynamics in maturation. Such variability seems to reflect the spontaneous formation and dissolution of different functional networks. We sought to extend these observations into healthy aging. Two different data sets, one EEG (total n  = 48, ages 18-72) and one magnetoencephalography (n = 31, ages 20-75) were analyzed for such spatiotemporal dependency using multiscale entropy (MSE) from regional brain sources. In both data sets, the changes in MSE were timescale dependent, with higher entropy at fine scales and lower at more coarse scales with greater age. The signals were parsed further into local entropy, related to  information processed within a regional source, and distributed entropy (information shared between two sources, i.e., functional connectivity). Local entropy increased for most regions, whereas the dominant change in distributed entropy was age-related reductions across hemispheres. These data further the understanding of changes in brain signal variability across the lifespan, suggesting an inverted U-shaped curve, but with an important qualifier. Unlike earlier in maturation, where the changes are more widespread, changes in adulthood show strong spatiotemporal dependence.
23395850	31	n = 31
23408984	44	n = 44	This observational, cross-sectional study investigates cortical signatures of developmental dyslexia, particularly from the perspective of behavioral remediation. We employed resting-state fMRI, and compared intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC) patterns of known reading regions (seeds) among three dyslexia groups characterized by (a) no remediation (current reading and spelling deficits), (b) partial remediation (only reading deficit remediated), and (c) full remediation (both reading and spelling deficits remediated), and a group of  age- and IQ-matched typically developing children (TDC) (total N = 44, age range  = 7-15 years). We observed significant group differences in iFC of two seeds located in the left posterior reading network - left intraparietal sulcus (L.IPS) and left fusiform gyrus (L.FFG). Specifically, iFC between L.IPS and left middle  frontal gyrus was significantly weaker in all dyslexia groups, irrespective of remediation status/literacy competence, suggesting that persistent dysfunction in the fronto-parietal attention network characterizes dyslexia. Additionally, relative to both TDC and the no remediation group, the remediation groups exhibited stronger iFC between L.FFG and right middle occipital gyrus (R.MOG). The full remediation group also exhibited stronger negative iFC between the same  L.FFG seed and right medial prefrontal cortex (R.MPFC), a core region of the default network These results suggest that behavioral remediation may be associated with compensatory changes anchored in L.FFG, which reflect atypically  stronger coupling between posterior visual regions (L.FFG-R.MOG) and greater functional segregation between task-positive and task-negative regions (L.FFG-R.MPFC). These findings were bolstered by significant relationships between the strength of the identified functional connections and literacy scores. We conclude that examining iFC can reveal cortical signatures of dyslexia with particular promise for monitoring neural changes associated with behavioral  remediation.
23419861	24	n = 24	Chronic widespread pain is a hallmark of fibromyalgia (FM). Previous neuroimaging studies have reported that the pain neuro-matrix in patients with FM showed augmented activation in response to actual pain. However, the effect of observing pain in others among patients with FM remains poorly understood. Both healthy female control subjects (n=24) and female patients with FM (n=23) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while observing a series of color pictures  depicting others' hands and feet being injured, and a matched set of control pictures that did not show any painful events. Compared with healthy subjects, patients with FM showed a smaller neural response to pain-related versus neutral  stimuli in several neural regions, including the thalamus, anterior cingulate cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, pre- and post-central gyrus, and supplementary motor area. In contrast to augmented pain processing in response to actual experimental pain, patients with FM did not show an enhanced pain response but generally showed lesser activation in cortical regions known to play a role in processing of pain. These hemodynamic alterations observed in patients with FM suggest that patients with chronic pain may empathize less with others in pain, possibly in order to lessen arousal and aversive self-oriented emotions.
23419861	23	n = 23
23437284	66	n = 66	OBJECTIVES: Several genetic studies have implicated the CACNA1C SNP rs1006737 in  bipolar disorder (BD) and schizophrenia (SZ) pathology. This polymorphism was recently found associated with increased amygdala activity in healthy controls and patients with BD. We performed a functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) study in a sample of BD and SZ cases and healthy controls to test for altered amygdala activity in carriers of the rs1006737 risk allele (AA/AG), and to investigate if there were differences across the diagnostic groups. METHODS: Rs1006737 was genotyped in 250 individuals (N = 66 BD, 61 SZ and 123 healthy controls), all of Northern European origin, who underwent an fMRI negative faces  matching task. Statistical tests were performed with a model correcting for sex,  age, diagnostic category and medication status in the total sample, and then in each diagnostic group. RESULTS: In the total sample, carriers of the risk allele  had increased activation in the left amygdala. Group-wise analyses showed that this effect was significant in the BD group, but not in the other diagnostic groups. However, there was no significant interaction effect for the risk allele  between BD and the other groups. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that CACNA1C SNP rs1006737 affects amygdala activity during emotional processing across all diagnostic groups. The current findings add to the growing body of knowledge of the pleiotropic effect of this polymorphism, and further support that ion channel dysregulation is involved in the underlying mechanisms of BD and SZ.
23453584	24	n = 24	INTRODUCTION: Verbal auditory hallucinations (VAHs) are experienced as spoken voices which seem to originate in the extracorporeal environment or inside the head. Animal and human research has identified a 'where' pathway for sound processing comprising the planum temporale, the middle frontal gyrus and the inferior parietal lobule. We hypothesize that increased activity of that 'where'  pathway mediates the exteriorization of VAHs. METHODS: The fMRI scans of 52 right-handed psychotic patients experiencing frequent VAHs were compared with the reported location of hallucinations, as rated with the aid of the PSYRATS-AHRS. For each subject, a unique VAH activation model was created based on the VAH timings, and subsequently convolved with a gamma function to model the hemodynamic response. In order to examine the neurofunctional equivalents of perceived VAH location, second-level group effects of subjects experiencing either internal (n = 24) or external (n = 28) VAHs were contrasted within planum  temporale, middle frontal gyrus, and inferior parietal lobule regions of interest (ROIs). RESULTS: Three ROIs were tested for increased activity in relation with the exteriorization of VAHs. The analysis revealed a left-sided medial planum temporale and a right-sided middle frontal gyrus cluster of increased activity. No significant activity was found in the inferior parietal lobule. CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that internal and external VAHs are mediated by a fronto-temporal pattern of neuronal activity while the exteriorization of VAHs stems from additional brain activity in the auditory 'where' pathway, comprising  the planum temporale and prefrontal regions.
23453584	28	n = 28
23457466	19	n = 19	INTRODUCTION: We aimed at dissociating the neural correlates of memory disorders  in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). METHODS: We included patients with AD (n = 19, 11 female, mean age 61 years) and  FTLD (n = 11, 5 female, mean age 61 years) in early stages of their diseases. Memory performance was assessed by means of verbal and visual memory subtests from the Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-R), including forgetting rates. Brain glucose utilization was measured by [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography  (FDG-PET) and brain atrophy by voxel-based morphometry (VBM) of T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. Using a whole brain approach, correlations between test performance and imaging data were computed separately in each dementia group, including a group of control subjects (n = 13, 6 female,  mean age 54 years) in both analyses. The three groups did not differ with respect to education and gender. RESULTS: Patients in both dementia groups generally performed worse than controls, but AD and FTLD patients did not differ from each  other in any of the test parameters. However, memory performance was associated with different brain regions in the patient groups, with respect to both hypometabolism and atrophy: Whereas in AD patients test performance was mainly correlated with changes in the parieto-mesial cortex, performance in FTLD patients was correlated with changes in frontal cortical as well as subcortical regions. There were practically no overlapping regions associated with memory disorders in AD and FTLD as revealed by a conjunction analysis. CONCLUSION: Memory test performance may not distinguish between both dementia syndromes. In clinical practice, this may lead to misdiagnosis of FTLD patients with poor memory performance. Nevertheless, memory problems are associated with almost completely different neural correlates in both dementia syndromes. Obviously, memory functions are carried out by distributed networks which break down in brain degeneration.
23457466	11	n = 11
23457466	13	n = 13
23468100	13	n = 13	RATIONALE: Impulsive behavior is associated with both alcohol use disorders and a family history of alcoholism (FHA). One operational definition of impulsive behavior is the stop-signal task (SST) which measures the time needed to stop a ballistic hand movement. OBJECTIVE: Employ functional magnetic resonance imaging  (fMRI) to study right frontal responses to stop signals in heavy drinking subjects with and without FHA, and as a function of alcohol exposure. METHODS: Twenty-two family history-positive (FHP; age = 22.7 years, SD = 1.9) and 18 family history-negative (FHN; age = 23.7, SD = 1.8) subjects performed the SST in fMRI in two randomized visits: once during intravenous infusion of alcohol, clamped at a steady-state breath alcohol (BrAC) concentration of 60 mg/dL, and once during infusion of placebo saline. An independent reference group (n = 13, age = 23.7, SD = 1.8) was used to identify a priori right prefrontal regions activated by successful inhibition (Inh) trials, relative to "Go" trials that carried no need for inhibition [Inh > Go]. RESULTS: FHA interacted with alcohol exposure in right prefrontal cortex, where alcohol reduced [Inh > Go] activation  in FHN subjects but not in FHP subjects. Within this right frontal cortical region, stop-signal reaction time also correlated negatively with [Inh > Go] activation, suggesting that the [Inh > Go] activity was related to inhibitory behavior. CONCLUSIONS: The results are consistent with the low level of response  theory (Schuckit, J Stud Alcohol 55:149-158, 1980; Quinn and Fromme, Alcohol Clin Exp Res 35:1759-1770, 2011), with FHP being less sensitive to alcohol's effects.
23468832	21	n = 21	Fear conditioning is relevant for elucidating the pathophysiology of anxiety, but may also be useful in the context of chronic pain syndromes which often overlap with anxiety. Thus far, no fear conditioning studies have employed aversive visceral stimuli from the lower gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, we implemented a fear conditioning paradigm to analyze the conditioned response to rectal pain stimuli using fMRI during associative learning, extinction and reinstatement. In  N = 21 healthy humans, visual conditioned stimuli (CS(+)) were paired with painful rectal distensions as unconditioned stimuli (US), while different visual  stimuli (CS(-)) were presented without US. During extinction, all CSs were presented without US, whereas during reinstatement, a single, unpaired US was presented. In region-of-interest analyses, conditioned anticipatory neural activation was assessed along with perceived CS-US contingency and CS unpleasantness. Fear conditioning resulted in significant contingency awareness and valence change, i.e., learned unpleasantness of a previously neutral stimulus. This was paralleled by anticipatory activation of the anterior cingulate cortex, the somatosensory cortex and precuneus (all during early acquisition) and the amygdala (late acquisition) in response to the CS(+). During extinction, anticipatory activation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to the  CS(-) was observed. In the reinstatement phase, a tendency for parahippocampal activation was found. Fear conditioning with rectal pain stimuli is feasible and  leads to learned unpleasantness of previously neutral stimuli. Within the brain,  conditioned anticipatory activations are seen in core areas of the central fear network including the amygdala and the anterior cingulate cortex. During extinction, conditioned responses quickly disappear, and learning of new predictive cue properties is paralleled by prefrontal activation. A tendency for  parahippocampal activation during reinstatement could indicate a reactivation of  the old memory trace. Together, these findings contribute to our understanding of aversive visceral learning and memory processes relevant to the pathophysiology of chronic abdominal pain.
23510545	33	n = 33	BACKGROUND: We examined women with recurrent brief depression (RBD) with and without episodes of hypomania with an n-back working memory paradigm to assess how working memory load affects the neurological network corresponding to working memory for these groups. METHOD: Participants (n=33) were medication-free and mostly euthymic while performing a 1-back and a 2-back task in the fMRI scanner.  Differential activation results between the tasks were assessed globally and within seven predefined regions of interest associated with working memory activation. The patient groups were compared with healthy women and matched for age, handedness, and length of education. RESULTS: Poor task modulation was observed in both RBD groups in the prefrontal cortex (BA9) in the 1-back task and activation during the 2-back task, particularly in a subgroup with a history of brief hypomanic episodes (RBD-H) compared with the subgroup without such episodes (RBD-O). Task modulation in the right parahippocampal gyrus (BA27) distinguished  the RBD-O group, and task modulation in the right insula clearly distinguished the RBD-H group. LIMITATIONS: Small sample size and recruitment of most patients  through media that may induce a selection bias towards better-functioning subjects. CONCLUSION: The observed lack of deactivation within the right insula has also been reported in patients with bipolar I disorders. Activation differences in BA9 and the parahippocampal region between RBD patients with and without a history of hypomania suggest different functional hypersensitivity of early limbic regions and ability to sustain attention and working memory, respectively, possibly identifying functional differences between the two subgroups.
23514930	18	n = 18	INTRODUCTION: Several neuroimaging studies have shown that visuospatial imagery is associated with a multitude of activation nodes spanning occipital, parietal,  temporal and frontal brain areas. However, the anatomical connectivity profile linking these areas is not well understood. Specifically, it is unknown whether cortical areas activated during visuospatial imagery are directly connected to one another, or whether few act as hubs which facilitate indirect connections between distant sites. Addressing this is important since mental imagery tasks are commonly used in clinical settings to assess complex cognitive functions such as spatial orientation. METHODS: We recorded functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data while participants (N = 18) performed a visuospatial imagery  task. In the same subjects, we acquired diffusion MRI (dMRI) and used state-of-the-art tractography robust to fiber crossings to reconstruct the white  matter tracts linking the fMRI activation sites. For each pair of these sites, we then computed the fraction of subjects showing a connection between them. RESULTS: Robust fMRI activation was observed in cortical areas spanning the dorsal (extrastriate, parietal and prefrontal areas) and ventral (temporal and lingual areas) pathways, as well as moderate deactivation in striate visual cortex. In over 80% of subjects, striate cortex showed anatomical connectivity with extrastriate (medial occipital) and lingual (posterior cingulate cortex - PCC) sites with the latter showing divergent connections to ventral (parahippocampus) and dorsal (BA7) activation areas. CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that posterior cingulate cortex is not only activated by visuospatial imagery, but also serves as an anatomical hub linking activity in occipital, parietal and temporal areas. This finding adds to the growing body of evidence pointing to PCC as a connector hub which may facilitate integration across widespread cortical areas.
23567883	33	n = 33	Optimistic bias (OB) is seen when individuals underestimate their probability of  experiencing negative life events and overestimate their probability of experiencing positive life events. A reduced OB has been linked with increased depression symptoms. However, given the relevance of this information to mood and anxiety disorders, little is currently known regarding the neurobiology of OB. In the current study, we examine the neural basis of OB in healthy individuals (n=33) during probability estimation of future positive and negative events occurring to themselves relative to other, comparable individuals. In line with previous work, subjects showed significant OB; they considered themselves significantly more likely to experience future positive and significantly less likely to experience future negative events relative to comparable others. Positive, relative to negative events, un-modulated by subjects' probability estimates, were associated with significantly greater activity within the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). Moreover, responses within both regions to positive events negatively related to  the healthy subjects' self reports of depression symptoms. However, there was no  significant modulation of activity in either region by the subject's OB, objectified as the level to which they thought the event was more likely [positive events] or less likely [negative events] to occur to them relative to comparable others. In contrast, activity within the rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC) was positively modulated by OB for positive events and activity within the anterior insula and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) was negatively modulated by OB for negative events. However, there was no significant relationship between responsiveness within these regions and self reports of depression symptoms. The data are discussed with reference to current models of vmPFC, rACC and anterior insula functioning.
23574584	46	n = 46	People tend to assume that outcomes are caused by dispositional factors, for example, a person's constitution or personality, even when the actual cause is due to situational factors, for example, luck or coincidence. This is known as the "correspondence bias." This tendency can lead normal, intelligent persons to  make suboptimal decisions. Here, we used a neuropsychological approach to investigate the neural basis of the correspondence bias, by studying economic decision-making in patients with damage to the ventromedial pFC (vmPFC). Given the role of the vmPFC in social cognition, we predicted that vmPFC is necessary for the normal correspondence bias. In our experiment, consistent with expectations, healthy (n = 46) and brain-damaged (n = 30) comparison participants displayed the correspondence bias during economic decision-making and invested no differently when given dispositional or situational information. By contrast, vmPFC patients (n = 17) displayed a lack of correspondence bias and invested more when given dispositional than situational information. The results support the conclusion that vmPFC is critical for normal social inference and the correspondence bias. The findings help clarify the important (and sometimes disadvantageous) role of social inference in economic decision-making.
23574584	30	n = 30
23574584	17	n = 17
23583742	19	n = 19	Serotonergic medications can mitigate the negative affective biases in disorders  such as depression or anxiety, but the neural mechanism by which this occurs is largely unknown. In line with recent advances demonstrating that negative affective biases may be driven by specific medial prefrontal-amygdala circuitry,  we asked whether serotonin manipulation can alter affective processing within a key dorsal medial prefrontal-amygdala circuit: the putative human homologue of the rodent prelimbic-amygdala circuit or 'aversive amplification' circuit. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover pharmaco-fMRI design, subjects (N=19)  performed a forced-choice face identification task with word distractors in an fMRI scanner over two separate sessions. On one session subjects received dietary depletion of the serotonin precursor tryptophan while on the other session they received a balanced placebo control diet. Results showed that dorsal medial prefrontal responding was elevated in response to fearful relative to happy faces under depletion but not placebo. This negative bias under depletion was accompanied by a corresponding increase in positive dorsal medial prefrontal-amygdala functional connectivity. We therefore conclude that serotonin depletion engages a prefrontal-amygdala circuit during the processing of fearful  relative to happy face stimuli. This same 'aversive amplification' circuit is also engaged during anxiety induced by shock anticipation. As such, serotonergic  projections may inhibit engagement of the 'aversive amplification' circuit and dysfunction in this projection may contribute to the negative affective bias in mood and anxiety disorders. These findings thus provide a promising explanation for the role of serotonin and serotonergic medications in the neurocircuitry of negative affective bias.
23596188	17	n = 17	People believe that women are more emotionally intense than men, but the scientific evidence is equivocal. In this study, we tested the novel hypothesis that men and women differ in the neural correlates of affective experience, rather than in the intensity of neural activity, with women being more internally (interoceptively) focused and men being more externally (visually) focused. Adult men (n = 17) and women (n = 17) completed a functional magnetic resonance imaging study while viewing affectively potent images and rating their moment-to-moment feelings of subjective arousal. We found that men and women do not differ overall in their intensity of moment-to-moment affective experiences when viewing evocative images, but instead, as predicted, women showed a greater association between the momentary arousal ratings and neural responses in the anterior insula cortex, which represents bodily sensations, whereas men showed stronger correlations between their momentary arousal ratings and neural responses in the  visual cortex. Men also showed enhanced functional connectivity between the dorsal anterior insula cortex and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, which constitutes the circuitry involved with regulating shifts of attention to the world. These results demonstrate that the same affective experience is realized differently in different people, such that women's feelings are relatively more self-focused, whereas men's feelings are relatively more world-focused.
23596188	17	n = 17
23596404	26	n = 26	Previous evidence shows a reliable association between psychosis-prone (especially schizotypal) personality traits and performance on dopamine (DA)-sensitive tasks (e.g., prepulse inhibition and antisaccade). Here, we used blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI and an established procedural learning (PL) task to examine the dopaminergic basis of two aspects of psychosis-proneness (specific schizotypy and general psychoticism). Thirty healthy participants (final N = 26) underwent fMRI during a blocked, periodic sequence-learning task which, in previous studies, has been shown to reveal impaired performance in schizophrenia patients given drugs blocking the DA D2 receptor subtype (DRD2), and to correspond with manipulation of DA activity and elicit fronto-striatal-cerebellar activity in healthy people. Psychosis-proneness was indexed by the Psychoticism (P) scale of the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire-Revised (EPQ-R; 1991) and the Schizotypal Personality Scale (STA; 1984). EPQ-R Extraversion and Neuroticism scores were also examined to establish  discriminant validity. We found a positive correlation between the two psychosis-proneness measures (r = 0.43), and a robust and unique positive association between EPQ-R P and BOLD signal in the putamen, caudate, thalamus, insula, and frontal regions. STA schizotypy score correlated positively with activity in the right middle temporal gyrus. As DA is a key transmitter in the basal ganglia, and the thalamus contains the highest levels of DRD2 receptors of  all extrastriatal regions, our results support a dopaminergic basis of psychosis-proneness as measured by the EPQ-R Psychoticism.
23599167	14	n = 14	Developmental dyslexia (DD) is a learning disability affecting 5-17% of children. Although researchers agree that DD is characterized by deficient phonological processing (PP), its cause is debated. It has been suggested that altered rapid auditory processing (RAP) may lead to deficient PP in DD and studies have shown deficient RAP in individuals with DD. Functional neuroimaging (fMRI) studies have implicated hypoactivations in left prefrontal brain regions during RAP in individuals with DD. When and how these neuronal alterations evolve remains unknown. In this article, we investigate functional networks during RAP in 28 children with (n = 14) and without (n = 14) a familial risk for DD before reading onset (mean: 5.6 years). Results reveal functional alterations in left-hemispheric prefrontal regions during RAP in prereading children at risk for DD, similar to findings in individuals with DD. Furthermore, activation during RAP in left prefrontal regions positively correlates with prereading measures of  PP and with neuronal activation during PP in posterior dorsal and ventral brain areas. Our results suggest that neuronal differences during RAP predate reading instruction and thus are not due to experience-dependent brain changes resulting  from DD itself and that there is a functional relationship between neuronal networks for RAP and PP within the prereading brain.
23599167	14	n = 14
23613739	28	n = 28	According to the conflict monitoring model of cognitive control, reaction time (RT) in distracter interference tasks (e.g., the Stroop task) is a more precise index of response conflict than stimulus congruency (incongruent vs. congruent).  The model therefore predicts that RT should be a reliable predictor of activity in regions of the posterior medial frontal cortex (pMFC) that are posited to detect response conflict. In particular, pMFC activity should be (a) greater in slow-RT than in fast-RT trials within a given task condition (e.g., congruent) and (b) equivalent in RT-matched trials from different conditions (i.e., congruent and incongruent trials). Both of these effects have been observed in functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies of adults. However, neither effect was observed in a recent study of healthy youth, suggesting that (a) the model does not accurately describe the relationship between RT and pMFC activity  in this population or (b) the recent study was characterized by high variability  due to a relatively small sample size. To distinguish between these possibilities, we asked a relatively large group of healthy youth (n = 28) to perform a distracter interference task - the multi-source interference task (MSIT) - while we recorded their brain activity with functional MRI. In this relatively large sample, both of the model's predictions were confirmed. We conclude that the model accurately describes the relationship between pMFC activity and RT in healthy youth, but that additional research is needed to determine whether processes unrelated to response conflict contribute to this relationship.
23616547	27	n = 27	Self-evaluations undergo significant transformation during early adolescence, developing in parallel with the heightened complexity of teenagers' social worlds. Intuitive theories of adolescent development, based in part on animal work, suggest that puberty is associated with neural-level changes that facilitate a "social reorientation" (Nelson et al., 2005). However, direct tests  of this hypothesis using neuroimaging are limited in humans. This longitudinal fMRI study examined neurodevelopmental trajectories associated with puberty, self-evaluations, and the presumed social reorientation during the transition from childhood to adolescence. Participants (N = 27, mean age = 10.1 and 13.1 years at time points one and two, respectively) engaged in trait evaluations of two targets (the self and a familiar fictional other), across two domains of competence (social and academic). Responses in ventromedial PFC increased with both age and pubertal development during self-evaluations in the social domain, but not in the academic domain. These results suggest that changes in social self-evaluations are intimately connected with biology, not just peer contexts, and provide important empirical support for the relationship between neurodevelopment, puberty, and social functioning.
23616756	26	n = 26	Despite the interest in the neuroimaging of working memory, little is still known about the neurobiology of complex working memory in tasks that require simultaneous manipulation and storage of information. In addition to the central  executive network, we assumed that the recently described salience network [involving the anterior insular cortex (AIC) and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)] might be of particular importance to working memory tasks that require complex, effortful processing. METHOD: Healthy participants (n = 26) and participants suffering from working memory problems related to the Kleine-Levin syndrome (KLS) (a specific form of periodic idiopathic hypersomnia; n = 18) participated in the study. Participants were further divided into a high- and low-capacity group, according to performance on a working memory task (listening  span). In a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, participants were administered the reading span complex working memory task tapping cognitive effort. PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The fMRI-derived blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD)  signal was modulated by (1) effort in both the central executive and the salience network and (2) capacity in the salience network in that high performers evidenced a weaker BOLD signal than low performers. In the salience network there was a dichotomy between the left and the right hemisphere; the right hemisphere elicited a steeper increase of the BOLD signal as a function of increasing effort. There was also a stronger functional connectivity within the central executive network because of increased task difficulty. CONCLUSION: The ability to allocate cognitive effort in complex working memory is contingent upon focused resources in the executive and in particular the salience network. Individual capacity during the complex working memory task is related to activity in the salience (but not the executive) network so that high-capacity participants evidence a lower signal and possibly hence a larger dynamic response.
23616756	18	n = 18
23620601	117	n = 117	The vast majority of attempts to quit smoking cigarettes are unsuccessful. Negative affect (NA) is one of the primary factors contributing to smoking relapse, in part because it interferes with psychological processes that are essential for self-regulation and coping. Converging evidence suggests that NA may be less of a problem for smokers with high relative to low dispositional self-control, but very little is known about the mechanisms that underlie this effect. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to address this issue by examining the associations between trait self-control, state levels of NA and patterns of brain activation in nicotine-deprived smokers (n = 117) during the performance of a verbal n-back paradigm (a task requiring cognitive processes that support self-regulation). While the activation of several brain regions linked to executive control correlated positively and negatively with state NA and trait self-control, respectively, an interaction between these factors was identified in only one region: the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). We conclude that the functions supported by the vmPFC are an important source of variability in smokers' self-regulatory functioning and propose that the region may contribute to the use of implicit forms of self-control under demanding circumstances.
23642469	14	n = 14	Individuals with schizophrenia evidence deficits in social functioning such as difficulties in communication, maintaining employment, and functioning as a member of the community. Impairment in such functions has been linked with higher order social cognitive deficits, which, in turn, have been associated with abnormal brain function. However, it is unclear whether brain abnormalities are found specifically for higher order social cognitive functioning, or whether "lower order" social processing, such as perceiving social stimuli, might demonstrate abnormalities at the neural level. The current study used functional  magnetic resonance imaging to explore the neural correlates of social perception  in schizophrenia. Individuals with schizophrenia (n=14) and healthy comparison participants (n=14) viewed social (i.e., faces, people) and nonsocial (i.e., scenes, objects) images that varied in affective content (emotional, neutral). Schizophrenia patients showed decreased brain activation, compared to controls, in occipital and temporal regions associated with early visual processing, as well as increased cingulate activity, in response to emotional social relative to nonsocial images. Results indicate aberrant neural response during early stages of visual processing of social information, which may contribute to higher order  social cognitive deficits characteristic of this population.
23642469	14	n = 14
23643106	67	n = 67	BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) modulate amygdala activity in healthy individuals. Increased responses to negative stimuli in carriers of low transcription alleles have been proposed to contribute to the  pathogenesis of depression. We sought to investigate the effects of genotype as well as diagnosis in patients with depression. METHODS: Subjects with recurrent depression (n=67) and matched healthy controls (n=49) participated in a fMRI task of implicit processing of sad facial stimuli. Effects of biallelic (short (S) and long (L) alleles) and triallelic (including rs25531 A/G single nucleotide variation) models of 5-HTTLPR polymorphisms on amygdala activity and connectivity were investigated. RESULTS: Significant effects were observed of both genotype and diagnosis on amygdala activity. Increased amygdala activity was associated with 5-HTTLPR genotype in low transcription allele carriers as well as with a diagnosis of depression. The connectivity analysis revealed a main effect of genotype with reduced connectivity to the subgenual region of the anterior cingulate in carriers of the low transcription alleles. There was also a main effect of diagnosis with reduced connectivity to the dorsal region of the anterior cingulate and to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in depression. There were no interaction effects between genotype and diagnosis in amygdala activity or connectivity. CONCLUSIONS: Significant independent effects of genotype and diagnosis on amygdala responsivity were revealed. The effects of genotype and diagnosis on amygdala connectivity showed a regional segregation, suggesting that 5-HTTLPR polymorphisms bias frontal-limbic connectivity while the development of  depression involves more extensive neural disturbances. These findings point to the potential of connectivity maps as a diagnostic biomarker for depression.
23643106	49	n = 49
23644912	18	n = 18	RATIONALE: Despite a national reduction in the prevalence of cigarette smoking, ~19% of the adult US population persists in this behavior, with the highest prevalence among 18-25-year-olds. Given that the choice to smoke imposes a known  health risk, clarification of brain function related to decision-making, particularly involving risk-taking, in smokers may inform prevention and smoking  cessation strategies. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to compare brain function related to decision-making in young smokers and nonsmokers. METHODS: The Balloon  Analogue Risk Task (BART) is a computerized risky decision-making task in which participants pump virtual balloons, each pump associated with an incremental increase in potential payoff on a given trial but also with greater risk of balloon explosion and loss of payoff. We used this task to compare brain activation associated with risky decision-making in smokers (n = 18) and nonsmokers (n = 25), while they performed the BART during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The participants were young men and women, 17-21 years  of age. RESULTS: Risk level (number of pumps) modulated brain activation in the right dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices more in smokers than in  nonsmokers, and smoking severity (Heaviness of Smoking Index) was positively related to this modulation in an adjacent frontal region. CONCLUSIONS: Given evidence for involvement of the right dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices in inhibitory control, these findings suggest that young smokers have a  different contribution of prefrontal cortical substrates to risky decision-making than nonsmokers. Future studies are warranted to determine whether the observed neurobiological differences precede or result from smoking.
23644912	25	n = 25
23660028	17	n = 17	Deficits in response inhibition and heightened impulsivity have been linked to psychiatric disorders and aggression. They have been investigated in clinical groups as well as individuals with trait characteristics, yielding insights into  the underlying neural and behavioral mechanisms of response inhibition and impulsivity. The motor inhibition tasks employed in most studies, however, have lacked an emotional component, which is crucial given that both response inhibition and impulsivity attain salience within a socio-emotional context. For  this fMRI study, we selected a group with high trait aggression (HA, n=17) and one with low trait aggression (LA, n=16) from 550 males who had completed an Aggression Questionnaire. Neural activation was compared to an emotional version  (including angry and neutral faces) of the stop signal task. Behavioral results revealed impaired response inhibition in HA, associated with higher motor impulsivity. This was accompanied by attenuated activation in brain regions involved in response inhibition, including the pre-supplementary motor area (SMA) and motor cortex. Together, these findings offer evidence that a reduced inhibition capacity is present in HA. Notably, response inhibition improved during anger trials in both groups, suggesting a facilitation effect through heightened activation in the related brain regions. In both groups, inclusion of  the anger stimuli enhanced the activation of the motor and somatosensory areas, which modulate executive control, and of limbic regions including the amygdala. In summary, the investigation of response inhibition in individuals with high and low trait characteristics affords useful insights into the underlying distinct processing mechanisms. It can contribute to the investigation of trait markers in a clinical context without having to deal with the complex mechanisms of a clinical disorder itself. In contrast, the mechanisms of emotional response inhibition did not differ between groups. Hence, the specific emotional influence is not interacting with trait aggression.
23660028	16	n = 16
23678111	1561	n = 1561	Some elderly appear to resist age-related decline in cognitive functions, but the neural correlates of successful cognitive aging are not well known. Here, older human participants from a longitudinal study were classified as successful or average relative to the mean attrition-corrected cognitive development across 15-20 years in a population-based sample (n = 1561). Fifty-one successful elderly and 51 age-matched average elderly (mean age: 68.8 years) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while performing an episodic memory face-name paired-associates task. Successful older participants had higher BOLD signal during encoding than average participants, notably in the bilateral PFC and the left hippocampus (HC). The HC activation of the average, but not the successful,  older group was lower than that of a young reference group (n = 45, mean age: 35.3 years). HC activation was correlated with task performance, thus likely contributing to the superior memory performance of successful older participants. The frontal BOLD response pattern might reflect individual differences present from young age. Additional analyses confirmed that both the initial cognitive level and the slope of cognitive change across the longitudinal measurement period contributed to the observed group differences in BOLD signal. Further, the differences between the older groups could not be accounted for by differences in brain structure. The current results suggest that one mechanism behind successful cognitive aging might be preservation of HC function combined with a high frontal responsivity. These findings highlight sources for heterogeneity in cognitive aging and may hold useful information for cognitive intervention studies.
23678111	45	n = 45
23684978	20	n = 20	Volumetric abnormalities of the hippocampus and frontal cortex are of major interest in the study of borderline personality disorder (BPD). To our knowledge, no study has examined volumetric abnormalities in the hippocampal subregions (head, body, and tail). Our aims were to investigate hippocampal volumetric abnormalities as well as abnormalities in the gray and white matter of the frontal cortex, basal ganglia, and anterior cingulate cortex in BPD in a sample of BPD patients compared to healthy controls. Using manual volumetry as well as optimized voxel based morphometry (VBM) we assessed the volumetric differences in a sample of females with BPD (n=20), compared to healthy female controls (n=21) (HC). The analyses revealed reductions in the left hippocampal head, body, and tail, and the right hippocampal tail. Hippocampal changes were confirmed also using VBM and additional volumetric reductions were found in the caudate and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of the BPD group. Our study reaffirms the existence of hippocampal volumetric, prefrontal and caudate abnormalities in BPD  and lends support to the stress-related explanation of these reductions, whilst also bringing new data to the topic in terms of the abnormalities found in the subregions.
23684978	21	n = 21
23707590	27	n = 27	Social exclusion and risk-taking are both common experiences of concern in adolescence, yet little is known about how the two may be related at behavioral or neural levels. In this fMRI study, adolescents (N=27, 14 male, 14-17years-old) completed a series of tasks in the scanner assessing risky decision-making before and after an episode of social exclusion. In this particular context, exclusion was associated with greater behavioral risk-taking among adolescents with low self-reported resistance to peer influence (RPI). When making risky decisions after social exclusion, adolescents who had lower RPI exhibited higher levels of  activity in the right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ), and this response in rTPJ  was a significant mediator of the relationship between RPI and greater risk-taking after social exclusion. Lower RPI was also associated with lower levels of activity in lPFC during crashes following social exclusion, but unlike  rTPJ this response in lPFC was not a significant mediator of the relationship between RPI and greater risk-taking after social exclusion. The results suggest that mentalizing and/or attentional mechanisms have a unique direct effect on adolescents' vulnerability to peer influence on risk-taking.
23720575	31	n = 31	Prior studies have suggested that positive social interactions are experienced as rewarding. Yet, it is not well understood how social relationships influence neural responses to other persons' gains. In this study, we investigated neural responses during a gambling task in which healthy participants (N = 31; 18 females) could win or lose money for themselves, their best friend or a disliked  other (antagonist). At the moment of receiving outcome, person-related activity was observed in the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), precuneus and temporal parietal junction (TPJ), showing higher activity for friends and antagonists than for self, and this activity was independent of outcome. The only region showing an interaction between the person-participants played for and outcome was the ventral striatum. Specifically, the striatum was more active following gains than losses for self and friends, whereas for the antagonist this pattern was reversed. Together, these results show that, in a context with social and reward information, social aspects are processed in brain regions associated  with social cognition (mPFC, TPJ), and reward aspects are processed in primary reward areas (striatum). Furthermore, there is an interaction of social and reward information in the striatum, such that reward-related activity was dependent on social relationship.
23727320	11	n = 11	Children who are poor readers usually experience troublesome school careers and consequently often suffer from secondary emotional and behavioural problems. Early identification and prediction of later reading problems thus are critical in order to start targeted interventions for those children with an elevated risk for emerging reading problems. In this study, behavioural precursors of reading were assessed in nineteen (aged 6.4 +/- 0.3 years) non-reading kindergarteners before training letter-speech sound associations with a computerized game (Graphogame) for eight weeks. The training aimed to introduce the basic principles of letter-speech sound correspondences and to initialize the sensitization of specific brain areas to print. Event-related potentials (ERP) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were recorded during an explicit word/symbol processing task after the training. Reading skills were assessed two years later in second grade. The focus of this study was on clarifying whether electrophysiological and fMRI data of kindergarten children significantly improve prediction of future reading skills in 2nd grade over behavioural data alone. Based on evidence from previous studies demonstrating the importance of initial print sensitivity in the left occipito-temporal visual word form system (VWFS) for learning to read, the first pronounced difference in processing words compared to symbols in the ERP, an occipito-temporal negativity  (N1: 188-281 ms) along with the corresponding functional activation in the left occipito-temporal VWFS were defined as potential predictors. ERP and fMRI data in kindergarteners significantly improved the prediction of reading skills in 2nd grade over behavioural data alone. Together with the behavioural measures they explained up to 88% of the variance. An additional discriminant analysis revealed a remarkably high accuracy in classifying normal (n=11) and poor readers (n=6). Due to the key limitation of the study, i.e. the small group sizes, the results of our prediction analyses should be interpreted with caution and regarded as preliminary despite cross-validation. Nevertheless our results indicate the potential of combining neuroimaging and behavioural measures to improve prediction at an early stage, when literacy skills are acquired and interventions are most beneficial.
23727320	6	n = 6
23746539	70	n = 70	BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder share overlapping symptoms and risk genes. Shared aberrant functional connectivity is hypothesized in both disorders and in relatives. METHODS: We investigated resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging in 70 schizophrenia and 64 psychotic bipolar probands, their respective first-degree relatives (n = 70 and 52), and 118 healthy subjects. We used independent component analysis to identify components representing various resting state networks and assessed spatial aspects of functional connectivity within all networks. We first investigated group differences using five-level, one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), followed by post hoc t tests within regions displaying ANCOVA group differences and correlation of such functional connectivity measures with symptom ratings to examine clinical relationships. RESULTS: Seven networks revealed abnormalities (five-level one-way ANCOVA, family-wise error correction p < .05): A) fronto-occipital, B) midbrain/cerebellum, C) frontal/thalamic/basal ganglia, D) meso/paralimbic, E) posterior default mode network, F) fronto-temporal/paralimbic and G) sensorimotor networks. Abnormalities in networks B and F were unique to schizophrenia probands. Furthermore, abnormalities in networks D and E were common to both patient groups. Finally, networks A, C, and G showed abnormalities shared by probands and their relative groups. Negative correlation with Positive  and Negative Syndrome Scale negative and positive scores were found in regions within network C and F respectively, and positive correlation with Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale negative scores was found in regions in network D among schizophrenia probands only. CONCLUSIONS: Schizophrenia, psychotic bipolar probands, and their relatives share both unique and overlapping within-network brain connectivity abnormalities, revealing potential psychosis endophenotypes.
23746615	11	n = 11	Both cognitive and social-cognitive deficits impact functional outcome in schizophrenia. Cognitive remediation studies indicate that targeted cognitive and/or social-cognitive training improves behavioral performance on trained skills. However, the neural effects of training in schizophrenia and their relation to behavioral gains are largely unknown. This study tested whether a 50-h intervention which included both cognitive and social-cognitive training would influence neural mechanisms that support social ccognition. Schizophrenia participants completed a computer-based intervention of either auditory-based cognitive training (AT) plus social-cognition training (SCT) (N=11) or non-specific computer games (CG) (N=11). Assessments included a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) task of facial emotion recognition, and behavioral measures of cognition, social cognition, and functional outcome. The fMRI results showed the predicted group-by-time interaction. Results were strongest for emotion recognition of happy, surprise and fear: relative to CG participants, AT+SCT participants showed a neural activity increase in bilateral  amygdala, right putamen and right medial prefrontal cortex. Across all participants, pre-to-post intervention neural activity increase in these regions  predicted behavioral improvement on an independent emotion perception measure (MSCEIT: Perceiving Emotions). Among AT+SCT participants alone, neural activity increase in right amygdala predicted behavioral improvement in emotion perception. The findings indicate that combined cognition and social-cognition training improves neural systems that support social-cognition skills.
23746615	11	n = 11
23750275	89	n = 89	The past decade has seen astounding discoveries about resting-state brain activity patterns in normal brain as well as their alterations in brain diseases. While the vast majority of resting-state studies are based on the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) functional MRI (fMRI), arterial spin labeling (ASL) perfusion fMRI can simultaneously capture BOLD and cerebral blood flow (CBF) signals, providing a unique opportunity for assessing resting brain functions with concurrent BOLD (ccBOLD) and CBF signals. Before taking that benefit, it is necessary to validate the utility of ccBOLD signal for resting-state analysis using conventional BOLD (cvBOLD) signal acquired without ASL modulations. To address this technical issue, resting cvBOLD and ASL perfusion MRI were acquired from a large cohort (n = 89) of healthy subjects. Four widely used resting-state brain function analyses were conducted and compared between the two types of BOLD signal, including the posterior cingulate  cortex (PCC) seed-based functional connectivity (FC) analysis, independent component analysis (ICA), analysis of amplitude of low frequency fluctuation (ALFF), and analysis of regional homogeneity (ReHo). Consistent default mode network (DMN) as well as other resting-state networks (RSNs) were observed from cvBOLD and ccBOLD using PCC-FC analysis and ICA. ALFF from both modalities were the same for most of brain regions but were different in peripheral regions suffering from the susceptibility gradients induced signal drop. ReHo showed difference in many brain regions, likely reflecting the SNR and resolution differences between the two BOLD modalities. The DMN and auditory networks showed highest CBF values among all RSNs. These results demonstrated the feasibility of  ASL perfusion MRI for assessing resting brain functions using its concurrent BOLD in addition to CBF signal, which provides a potentially useful way to maximize the utility of ASL perfusion MRI.
23755002	35	n = 35	Multimodal brain imaging data have shown increasing utility in answering both scientifically interesting and clinically relevant questions. Each brain imaging  technique provides a different view of brain function or structure, while multimodal fusion capitalizes on the strength of each and may uncover hidden relationships that can merge findings from separate neuroimaging studies. However, most current approaches have focused on pair-wise fusion and there is still relatively little work on N-way data fusion and examination of the relationships among multiple data types. We recently developed an approach called "mCCA + jICA" as a novel multi-way fusion method which is able to investigate the disease risk factors that are either shared or distinct across multiple modalities as well as the full correspondence across modalities. In this paper, we applied this model to combine resting state fMRI (amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation, ALFF), gray matter (GM) density, and DTI (fractional anisotropy, FA) data, in order to elucidate the abnormalities underlying schizophrenia patients (SZs, n = 35) relative to healthy controls (HCs, n = 28). Both modality-common and modality-unique abnormal regions were identified in SZs, which were then used for successful classification for seven modality-combinations, showing the potential for a broad applicability of the mCCA + jICA model and its results. In  addition, a pair of GM-DTI components showed significant correlation with the positive symptom subscale of Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), suggesting that GM density changes in default model network along with white-matter disruption in anterior thalamic radiation are associated with increased positive PANSS. Findings suggest the DTI anisotropy changes in frontal  lobe may relate to the corresponding functional/structural changes in prefrontal  cortex and superior temporal gyrus that are thought to play a role in the clinical expression of SZ.
23755002	28	n = 28
23756137	102	n = 102	We report a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of healthy adult participants who completed a demanding Go/NoGo task. The primary purpose of this  study was to delineate the neural systems underlying successful and unsuccessful  response inhibition using a large sample (N=102). We identified a number of regions uniquely engaged during successful response inhibition, including a fronto-parietal network involving the anterior cingulate, supplementary motor areas, lateral and inferior prefrontal regions, and the inferior parietal lobule. Unique hemodynamic activity was also noted in the amygdala and in frontostriatal  regions including the inferior frontal gyrus and portions of the basal ganglia. Also, contrasts were defined to explore three variants of hemodynamic response allowing for more specificity in identifying the underlying cognitive mechanisms  of response inhibition. Addressing issues raised by prior small sample studies, we identified a stable set of regions involved in successful response inhibition. The present results help to incrementally refine the specificity of the neural correlates of response inhibition.
23761753	5	n = 5	The relation between the sensorimotor cortex and the language network has been widely discussed but still remains controversial. Two independent theories compete to explain how this area is involved during action-related verbs processing. The embodied view assumes that action word representations activate sensorimotor representations which are accessed when an action word is processed  or when an action is observed. The abstract hypothesis states that the mental representations of words are abstract and independent of the objects' sensorimotor properties they refer to. We combined neuropsychological and fMRI-PPI connectivity data, to address action-related verbs processing in neurosurgical patients with lesions involving (N = 5) or sparing (N = 5) the primary motor cortex and healthy controls (N = 12). A lack of significant changes in the functional coupling between the left M1 cortex and functional nodes of the linguistic network during the verb generation task was found for all the groups.  In addition, we found that the ability to perform an action verb naming task was  not related to a damaged M1. These data showed that there was not a task-specific functional interaction active between M1 and the inferior frontal gyrus. We will  discuss how these findings indicate that action words do not automatically activate the M1 cortex; we suggest rather that its enrolment could be related to  other not strictly linguistic processing.
23761753	5	n = 5
23761753	12	n = 12
23770536	48	n = 48	The goal of the present study was to examine age-related differences in hippocampal and cortical contribution to episodic retrieval of spatial context in 3 age groups. Children ages 8-9 and 10-11 years old, and adults ages 18-25 (N=48) encoded black and white line drawings appearing either on the right side or the left side of a screen. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were acquired while participants attempted to recall where each studied drawing had originally appeared. Correct recall of spatial source indicated successful episodic retrieval of spatial context. Activity in head and body of the hippocampus was associated with episodic retrieval in adults, but not in children. In children, individual differences in hippocampal activation for recognition predicted rates of correct spatial recall. Developmental differences  were also found in regions in posterior parietal cortex, anterior prefrontal cortex, and insula. Overall, these results support the view that the development  of episodic memory is supported by functional changes in the hippocampus as well  as cortical regions.
23775490	46	n = 46	The variety of different causal theories together with inconsistencies about the  anatomical brain markers emphasize the heterogeneity of developmental dyslexia. Attempts were made to test on a behavioral level the existence of subtypes of dyslexia showing distinguishable cognitive deficits. Importantly, no research was directly devoted to the investigation of structural brain correlates of these subtypes. Here, for the first time, we applied voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to study grey matter volume (GMV) differences in a relatively large sample (n = 46)  of dyslexic children split into three subtypes based on the cognitive deficits: phonological, rapid naming, magnocellular/dorsal, and auditory attention shifting. VBM revealed GMV clusters specific for each studied group including areas of left inferior frontal gyrus, cerebellum, right putamen, and bilateral parietal cortex. In addition, using discriminant analysis on these clusters 79% of cross-validated cases were correctly re-classified into four groups (controls  vs. three subtypes). Current results indicate that dyslexia may result from distinct cognitive impairments characterized by distinguishable anatomical markers.
23812762	22	n = 22	RATIONALE: Flexible behavior optimization relies on cognitive control which includes the ability to suppress automatic responses interfering with relevant goals. Extensive evidence suggests that the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is the central node in a predominantly frontal cortical network subserving executive tasks. Neuroimaging studies indicate that the ACC is sensitive to acute intoxication during conflict, but such evidence is limited to tasks using manual  responses with arbitrary response contingencies. OBJECTIVES: The present study was designed to examine whether alcohol's effects on top-down cognitive control would generalize to the oculomotor system during inhibition of hardwired saccadic responses. METHODS: Healthy social drinkers (N = 22) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning and eye movement tracking during alcohol (0.6 g/kg ethanol for men, 0.55 g/kg for women) and placebo conditions in a counterbalanced design. They performed visually guided prosaccades (PS) towards a target and volitional antisaccades (AS) away from it. To mitigate possible vasoactive effects of alcohol on the BOLD (blood oxygenation level-dependent) signal, resting perfusion was quantified with arterial spin labeling (ASL) and used as a covariate in the BOLD analysis. RESULTS: Saccadic conflict was subserved by a distributed frontoparietal network. However, alcohol intoxication  selectively attenuated activity only in the ACC to volitional AS and erroneous responses. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides converging evidence for the selective ACC vulnerability to alcohol intoxication during conflict across different response modalities and executive tasks, confirming its supramodal, high-level role in cognitive control. Alcohol intoxication may impair top-down regulative functions by attenuating the ACC activity, resulting in behavioral disinhibition  and decreased self-control.
23825407	13	n = 13	Emotionally arousing pictures induce increased activation of visual pathways relative to emotionally neutral images. A predominant model for the preferential  processing and attention to emotional stimuli posits that the amygdala modulates  sensory pathways through its projections to visual cortices. However, recent behavioral studies have found intact perceptual facilitation of emotional stimuli in individuals with amygdala damage. To determine the importance of the amygdala  to modulations in visual processing, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine visual cortical blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal in response to emotionally salient and neutral images in a sample of human patients with unilateral medial temporal lobe resection that included the amygdala. Adults with right (n = 13) or left (n = 5) medial temporal lobe resections were compared with demographically matched healthy control participants (n = 16). In the control participants, both aversive and erotic images produced robust BOLD signal increases in bilateral primary and secondary visual cortices relative to neutral images. Similarly, all patients with amygdala resections showed enhanced visual cortical activations to erotic images both ipsilateral and contralateral to the lesion site. All but one of the amygdala resection patients showed similar enhancements to aversive stimuli and there were no significant group differences in visual cortex BOLD responses in patients compared with controls for either aversive or erotic images. Our results indicate that neither the right nor left amygdala is necessary for the heightened visual cortex BOLD responses observed during emotional stimulus presentation. These data challenge an amygdalo-centric model of emotional modulation and suggest that non-amygdalar processes contribute to the emotional modulation of sensory pathways.
23825407	5	n = 5
23825407	16	n = 16
23832422	20	n = 20	RATIONALE: Response inhibition abnormalities contribute to several maladaptive behaviors commonly observed during adolescence, including heavy drinking. OBJECTIVES: The present study aimed to determine whether abnormalities in brain response during response inhibition predate or follow adolescents' transition into heavy drinking, which is pivotal in identifying the neural antecedents and consequences of adolescent alcohol use. METHODS: Longitudinal functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) acquired during a response inhibition task was collected on adolescents before the onset of heavy drinking and then again on the same scanner approximately 3 years later. Adolescents who transitioned into heavy drinking (n = 20) were matched to continuously nondrinking adolescents (n = 20) on baseline and follow-up demographic and developmental variables. RESULTS: During no-go relative to go trials, participants showed responses common to inhibitory circuitry: frontal (e.g., pre-supplementary motor area), temporal, and parietal regions. A repeated measures analysis of covariance revealed that adolescents who later transitioned into heavy drinking showed less fMRI response  contrast at baseline than continuous nondrinkers in frontal, parietal, subcortical, and cerebellar regions (p < 0.01, clusters >756 mul), then increased activation after the onset of heavy drinking in frontal, parietal, and cerebellar areas. CONCLUSIONS: Future heavy drinkers showed less activation of inhibitory circuitry before the onset of heavy drinking. After transitioning into heavy drinking, they showed more activation during response inhibition than nondrinking controls. These results contribute to the growing literature suggesting that neural vulnerabilities exist prior to the onset of substance use, and the initiation of heavy drinking may lead to additional alterations in brain functioning.
23832422	20	n = 20
23851324	25	n = 25	Effective navigation of the social world relies on the correct interpretation of  facial emotions. This may be particularly important in formative years. Critically, literature examining the emergence of face processing in youth (children and adolescents) has focused on the neural and behavioral correlates of processing adult faces, which are relationally different from youth participants, and whose facial expressions may convey different meaning than faces of their peers. During a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan, we compared concurrent neural and behavioral responses as youth (N=25) viewed validated, emotionally varied (i.e., anger, fear, happy, and neutral) adult and child face stimuli. We observed that participants made fewer errors when matching adult, compared to child, face stimuli, and that while similar brain regions were involved in processing both adult and child faces, activation in the face processing neural network was greater for adult than child faces. This was true across emotions, and also when comparing neutral adult versus neutral child faces. Additionally, a valence by stimuli-type effect was observed within the amygdala. That is, within adult face stimuli, negative and neutral face stimuli elicited the largest effects, whereas within child face stimuli, happy face stimuli elicited the largest amygdala effects. Thus, heightened engagement of the amygdala was observed for happy child and angry adult faces, which may reflect age-specific salience of select emotions in early life. This study provides evidence that the relational age of the perceived face influences neural processing in youth.
23859650	42	n = 42	As a social species, humans are acutely aware of cues that signal inclusionary status. This study characterizes behavioral and neural responses when individuals anticipate social feedback. Across two fMRI studies, participants (n = 42) made social judgments about supposed peers and then received feedback from those individuals. Of particular interest was the neural activity occurring when participants were awaiting social feedback. During this anticipatory period, increased neural activity was observed in the ventral striatum, a central component of the brain's reward circuitry, and dorsomedial pFC, a brain region implicated in mentalizing about others. Individuals high in rejection sensitivity exhibited greater responses in both the ventral striatum and dorsomedial pFC when anticipating positive feedback. These findings provide initial insight into the neural mechanisms involved in anticipating social evaluations as well as the cognitive processes that underlie rejection sensitivity.
23861765	15	n = 15	OBJECTIVES: Two parallel pathways have been proposed between the hippocampus and  neocortex. Recently, the anterior and posterior hippocampus showed distinct connectivity with different cortical areas in an fMRI study. We investigated whether the two parallel pathways could be confirmed in patients with transient global amnesia (TGA) which is a natural lesion model of a perturbation of the hippocampus. In addition, we evaluated the relationship between the location of the hippocampal lesion and various clinical variables. METHODS: A consecutive series of 37 patients were identified from the TGA registry database of Seoul National University Bundang Hospital. Based on the location of the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) lesion along the anterior-posterior axis of the  hippocampus, they were divided into the following three groups: head (n = 15), body (n = 15) or tail (n = 7). To evaluate which cortical regions showed hypoperfusion according to the location of the DWI lesion, their SPECT images were compared between two groups using statistical parametric mapping. We performed hierarchical cluster analysis to group demographic and clinical variables, including the location of the DWI lesion, into clusters. RESULTS: Statistical parametric mapping analyses revealed that more anterior DWI lesions were associated with hypoperfusion of the anterior temporal and frontal areas, whereas more posterior lesions were associated with hypoperfusion of the posterior temporal, parietal, occipital and cerebellar areas. The difference was  most prominent between the group of hippocampal lesions on the head and tail. Hierarchical cluster analysis demonstrated that vomiting was related to female gender and hippocampal head lesions, whereas vascular risk factors were related to male gender and hippocampal body lesions. CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed the parallel pathways between the hippocampus and neocortex with DWI and SPECT images of patients with TGA. Patients with hippocampal head lesions and body lesions were clustered within different groups of clinical variables.
23861765	15	n = 15
23861765	7	n = 7
23887812	24	n = 24	This study used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate brain activation during preparatory and regulatory control while participants (N = 24)  were instructed either to simply view or decrease their emotional response to, pleasant, neutral or unpleasant pictures. A main effect of emotional valence on brain activity was found in the right precentral gyrus, with greater activation during positive than negative emotion regulation. A main effect of regulation phase was evident in the bilateral anterior prefrontal cortex (PFC), precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex, right putamen and temporal and occipital lobes, with  greater activity in these regions during preparatory than regulatory control. A valence X regulation interaction was evident in regions of ventromedial PFC and anterior cingulate cortex, reflecting greater activation while regulating negative than positive emotion, but only during active emotion regulation (not preparation). Conjunction analyses revealed common brain regions involved in differing types of emotion regulation including selected areas of left lateral PFC, inferior parietal lobe, temporal lobe, right cerebellum and bilateral dorsomedial PFC. The right lateral PFC was additionally activated during the modulation of both positive and negative valence. Findings demonstrate significant modulation of brain activity during both preparation for, and active  regulation of positive and negative emotional states.
23887820	20	n = 20	Many people routinely criticise themselves. While self-criticism is largely unproblematic for most individuals, depressed patients exhibit excessive self-critical thinking, which leads to strong negative affects. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging in healthy subjects (N = 20) to investigate neural correlates and possible psychological moderators of self-critical processing. Stimuli consisted of individually selected adjectives of personally negative content and were contrasted with neutral and negative non-self-referential adjectives. We found that confrontation with self-critical material yielded neural activity in regions involved in emotions (anterior insula/hippocampus-amygdala formation) and in anterior and posterior cortical midline structures, which are associated with self-referential and autobiographical memory processing. Furthermore, contrasts revealed an extended network of bilateral frontal brain areas. We suggest that the co-activation of superior and inferior lateral frontal brain regions reflects the recruitment of a frontal top-down pathway, representing cognitive reappraisal strategies for dealing with evoked negative affects. In addition, activation of right superior frontal areas was positively associated with neuroticism and negatively associated with cognitive reappraisal. Although these findings may not be specific to negative stimuli, they support a role for clinically relevant personality traits in successful regulation of emotion during confrontation with  self-critical material.
23904213	18	n = 18	Humans vary substantially in their ability to learn new motor skills. Here, we examined inter-individual differences in learning to play the piano, with the goal of identifying relations to structural properties of white matter fiber tracts relevant to audio-motor learning. Non-musicians (n = 18) learned to perform three short melodies on a piano keyboard in a pure audio-motor training condition (vision of their own fingers was occluded). Initial learning times ranged from 17 to 120 min (mean +/- SD: 62 +/- 29 min). Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging was used to derive the fractional anisotropy (FA), an  index of white matter microstructural arrangement. A correlation analysis revealed that higher FA values were associated with faster learning of piano melodies. These effects were observed in the bilateral corticospinal tracts, bundles of axons relevant for the execution of voluntary movements, and the right superior longitudinal fasciculus, a tract important for audio-motor transformations. These results suggest that the speed with which novel complex audio-motor skills can be acquired may be determined by variability in structural properties of white matter fiber tracts connecting brain areas functionally relevant for audio-motor learning.
23904464	25	n = 25	It has consistently been reported that "negative" subsequent memory effects-lower study activity for later remembered than later forgotten items-are attenuated in  older individuals. The present functional magnetic resonance imaging study investigated whether these findings extend to subsequent memory effects associated with successful encoding of item-context information. Older (n = 25) and young (n = 17) subjects were scanned while making 1 of 2 encoding judgments on a series of pictures. Memory was assessed for the study item and, for items judged old, the item's encoding task. Both memory judgments were made using confidence ratings, permitting item and source memory strength to be unconfounded and source confidence to be equated across age groups. Replicating prior findings, negative item effects in regions of the default mode network in young subjects were reversed in older subjects. Negative source effects, however, were  invariant with respect to age and, in both age groups, the magnitude of the effects correlated with source memory performance. It is concluded that negative  item effects do not reflect processes necessary for the successful encoding of item-context associations in older subjects. Negative source effects, in contrast, appear to reflect the engagement of processes that are equally important for successful episodic encoding in older and younger individuals.
23904464	17	n = 17
23904618	253	n = 253	As a relatively recent cultural invention in human evolution, reading is an important gateway to personal development and socioeconomic success. Despite the  well documented individual differences in reading ability, its neuroanatomical correlates have not been well understood, largely due to the fact that reading is a complex skill that consists of multiple components. Using a large sample of 416 college students and 7 reading tasks, the present study successfully identified three uncorrelated components of reading ability: phonological decoding, form-sound association, and naming speed. We then tried to predict individuals' scores in these components from their gray matter volume (GMV) on a subset of participants (N = 253) with high-quality structural images, adopting a multivariate support vector regression analysis with tenfold cross-validation. Our results revealed distinct neural regions that supported different aspects of  reading ability: whereas phonological decoding was associated with the GMV in the left superior parietal lobe extending to the supramarginal gyrus, form-sound association was predicted by the GMV in the hippocampus and cerebellum. Naming speed was associated with GMV in distributed brain regions in the occipital, temporal, parietal, and frontal cortices. Phonological decoding and form-sound association were uncorrelated with general cognitive abilities. However, naming speed was correlated with intelligence and processing speed, and some of the regions that were predictive of naming speed also predicted these general cognitive abilities. These results provide further insights on the cognitive and  neural architecture of reading and the structural basis of individual differences in reading abilities.
23913754	35	n = 35	We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate spatial working memory (WM) in an N-BACK task (0, 1, and 2-BACK) in premanifest Huntington's disease (pre-HD, n = 35), early symptomatic Huntington's disease (symp-HD, n = 23), and control (n = 32) individuals. Overall, both WM conditions  (1-BACK and 2-BACK) activated a large network of regions throughout the brain, common to all groups. However, voxel-wise and time-course analyses revealed significant functional group differences, despite no significant behavioral performance differences. During 1-BACK, voxel-wise blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal activity was significantly reduced in a number of regions from the  WM network (inferior frontal gyrus, anterior insula, caudate, putamen, and cerebellum) in pre-HD and symp-HD groups, compared with controls; however, time-course analysis of the BOLD response in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) showed increased activation in symp-HD, compared with pre-HD and controls. The pattern of reduced voxel-wise BOLD activity in pre-HD and symp-HD,  relative to controls, became more pervasive during 2-BACK affecting the same structures as in 1-BACK, but also incorporated further WM regions (anterior cingulate gyrus, parietal lobe and thalamus). The DLPFC BOLD time-course for 2-BACK showed a reversed pattern to that observed in 1-BACK, with a significantly diminished signal in symp-HD, relative to pre-HD and controls. Our findings provide support for functional brain reorganisation in cortical and subcortical regions in both pre-HD and symp-HD, which are modulated by task difficulty. Moreover, the lack of a robust striatal BOLD signal in pre-HD may represent a very early signature of change observed up to 15 years prior to clinical diagnosis.
23913754	23	n = 23
23913754	32	n = 32
23949893	30	n = 30	Deficits in response inhibition and error processing can result in maladaptive behavior, including failure to use past mistakes to inform present decisions. A specific deficit in inhibiting a prepotent response represents one aspect of impulsivity and is a prominent feature of addictive behaviors in general, including cocaine abuse/dependence. Brain regions implicated in cognitive control exhibit reduced activation in cocaine abusers. The purposes of the present investigation were (1) to identify neural differences associated with error processing in current and former cocaine-dependent individuals compared to healthy controls and (2) to determine whether former, long-term abstinent cocaine users showed similar differences compared with current users. The present study used an fMRI Go/No-Go task to investigate differences in BOLD response to correct rejections and false alarms between current cocaine users (n = 30), former cocaine users (n = 29), and healthy controls (n = 35). Impulsivity trait measures were also assessed and compared with BOLD activity. Nineteen regions of interest  previously implicated in errors of disinhibition were queried. There were no group differences in the correct rejections condition, but both current and former users exhibited increased BOLD response relative to controls for false alarms. In current users, the pregenual cingulate gyrus and left angular/supramarginal gyri overactivated. In former users, the right middle frontal/precentral gyri, right inferior parietal lobule, and left angular/supramarginal gyri overactivated. Overall, our results support a hypothesis that neural activity in former users differs more from healthy controls than that of current users due to cognitive compensation that facilitates abstinence.
23949893	29	n = 29
23949893	35	n = 35
23954109	22	n = 22	BACKGROUND: Childhood maltreatment has been shown to significantly elevate the risk of psychiatric disorder. Previous neuroimaging studies of children exposed to maltreatment have reported atypical neural structure in several regions, including the prefrontal cortex and temporal lobes. These studies have exclusively investigated volumetric differences rather than focusing on genetically and developmentally distinct indices of brain structure. METHODS: Here we used surface-based methods to examine cortical thickness, surface area, and local gyrification in a community sample of children with documented experiences of abuse (n = 22) and a group of carefully matched nonmaltreated peers (n = 21). RESULTS: Reduced cortical thickness in the maltreated compared with the nonmaltreated group was observed in an extended cluster that incorporated the anterior cingulate, superior frontal gyrus, and orbitofrontal cortex. In addition, reduced cortical surface area was observed within the parcellated regions of the left middle temporal area and lingual gyrus. Local gyrification deficits within the maltreated group were located within two clusters, the lingual gyrus and the insula extending into pars opercularis. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first time structural abnormalities in the anterior cingulate and lingual gyrus have been detected in children exposed to maltreatment. Surface-based methods seem to capture subtle, previously undetected, morphological abnormalities associated with maltreatment. We suggest  that these approaches detect developmental precursors of brain volume differences seen in adults with histories of abuse. Because the reported regions are implicated in several clinical disorders, they might constitute biological markers of vulnerability, linking exposure to early adversity and psychiatric risk.
23954109	21	n = 21
23960206	28	n = 28	Increased frontal cortex activation during cognitive task performance is common in aging but remains poorly understood. Here we explored patterns of age-related  frontal brain activations under multiple task performance conditions and their relationship to white matter (WM) microstructure. Groups of younger (N = 28) and  older (N = 33) participants completed a task-switching paradigm while functional  magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was performed, and rested while diffusion tensor imaging was performed. Results from fMRI analyses indicated age-related increases in frontal brain activations under conditions of poorer performance in  the older group (the nonswitch and switch conditions) and for a contrast in which behavioral performance was equated (older group nonswitch condition vs. younger group switch condition). Within the older adult group, higher frontal activation  was associated with poorer behavioral performance under all task conditions. In 2 regions in right frontal cortex, blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) magnitudes were negatively correlated with WM integrity in tracts connecting these structures with other task-relevant frontoparietal and striatal regions. Our results link age-related declines in the efficiency of frontal cortex functioning with lower WM integrity in aging.
23960206	33	n = 33
23966680	1	n = 1	We examined the influence of focal cerebellar lesions on working memory (n-back task), gait, and the interaction between working memory and different gait tasks  in a dual-task paradigm. The analysis included 17 young patients with chronic focal lesions after cerebellar tumor resection and 17 age-matched controls. Patients have shown mild to moderate ataxia. Lesion sites were examined on the basis of structural magnetic resonance imaging. N-back tasks were executed with different levels of difficulty (n = 1-4) during sitting (baseline), treadmill walking, and treadmill tandem walking (dual-task conditions). Patients exhibited  decreased n-back performance particularly at difficult n-back levels and in dual-task conditions. Voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping revealed that decreased  baseline n-back performance was associated with lesions of the posterolateral cerebellar hemisphere and the dentate nucleus. By contrast, decreased n-back performance in dual-task conditions was more associated with motor-related areas  including dorsal portions of the dentate and the interposed nucleus, suggesting a prioritization of the motor task. During baseline walking, increased gait variability was associated with lesions in medial and intermediate regions, whereas for baseline tandem gait, lesions in the posterolateral hemispheres and the dentate nucleus became important. Posterolateral regions overlapped with regions related to baseline n-back performance. Consistently, we observed increased tandem gait variability with growing n-back difficulty in the dual-task condition. These findings suggest that dual-task effects in cerebellar patients are at least partially caused by a common involvement of posterolateral cerebellar regions in working memory and complex motor tasks.
23983029	94	n = 94	Chronic pain conditions are associated with abnormalities in brain structure and  function. Moreover, some studies indicate that brain activity related to the subjective perception of chronic pain may be distinct from activity for acute pain. However, the latter are based on observations from cross-sectional studies. How brain activity reorganizes with transition from acute to chronic pain has remained unexplored. Here we study this transition by examining brain activity for rating fluctuations of back pain magnitude. First we compared back pain-related brain activity between subjects who have had the condition for approximately 2 months with no prior history of back pain for 1 year (early, acute/subacute back pain group, n = 94), to subjects who have lived with back pain for >10 years (chronic back pain group, n = 59). In a subset of subacute back pain patients, we followed brain activity for back pain longitudinally over  a 1-year period, and compared brain activity between those who recover (recovered acute/sub-acute back pain group, n = 19) and those in which the back pain persists (persistent acute/sub-acute back pain group, n = 20; based on a 20% decrease in intensity of back pain in 1 year). We report results in relation to meta-analytic probabilistic maps related to the terms pain, emotion, and reward (each map is based on >200 brain imaging studies, derived from neurosynth.org). We observed that brain activity for back pain in the early, acute/subacute back pain group is limited to regions involved in acute pain, whereas in the chronic back pain group, activity is confined to emotion-related circuitry. Reward circuitry was equally represented in both groups. In the recovered acute/subacute back pain group, brain activity diminished in time, whereas in the persistent acute/subacute back pain group, activity diminished in acute pain regions, increased in emotion-related circuitry, and remained unchanged in reward circuitry. The results demonstrate that brain representation for a constant percept, back pain, can undergo large-scale shifts in brain activity with the transition to chronic pain. These observations challenge long-standing theoretical concepts regarding brain and mind relationships, as well as provide important novel insights regarding definitions and mechanisms of chronic pain.
23983029	59	n = 59
23983029	19	n = 19
23983029	20	n = 20
23985135	37	n = 37	Complex mental activity induces improvements in cognition, brain function, and structure in animals and young adults. It is not clear to what extent the aging brain is capable of such plasticity. This study expands previous evidence of generalized cognitive gains after mental training in healthy seniors. Using 3 MRI-based measurements, that is, arterial spin labeling MRI, functional connectivity, and diffusion tensor imaging, we examined brain changes across 3 time points pre, mid, and post training (12 weeks) in a randomized sample (n = 37) who received cognitive training versus a control group. We found significant  training-related brain state changes at rest; specifically, 1) increases in global and regional cerebral blood flow (CBF), particularly in the default mode network and the central executive network, 2) greater connectivity in these same  networks, and 3) increased white matter integrity in the left uncinate demonstrated by an increase in fractional anisotropy. Improvements in cognition were identified along with significant CBF correlates of the cognitive gains. We  propose that cognitive training enhances resting-state neural activity and connectivity, increasing the blood supply to these regions via neurovascular coupling. These convergent results provide preliminary evidence that neural plasticity can be harnessed to mitigate brain losses with cognitive training in seniors.
23990958	19	n = 19	PURPOSE: To investigate the pattern of spontaneous neural activity in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) with and without neurocognitive dysfunction using resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) with a regional homogeneity (ReHo) algorithm. MATERIALS AND METHODS: rs-fMRI data were acquired in 36 ESRD patients (minimal nephro-encephalopathy [MNE], n = 19, 13 male, 37+/-12.07 years; non-nephro-encephalopathy [non-NE], n = 17, 11 male, 38+/-12.13 years) and 20 healthy controls (13 male, 7 female, 36+/-10.27 years).  Neuropsychological (number connection test type A [NCT-A], digit symbol test [DST]) and laboratory tests were performed in all patients. The Kendall's coefficient of concordance (KCC) was used to measure the regional homogeneity for each subject. The regional homogeneity maps were compared using ANOVA tests among MNE, non-NE, and healthy control groups and post hoc t -tests between each pair in a voxel-wise way. A multiple regression analysis was performed to evaluate the relationships between ReHo index and NCT-A, DST scores, serum creatinine and urea levels, disease and dialysis duration. RESULTS: Compared with healthy controls, both MNE and non-NE patients showed decreased ReHo in the multiple areas of bilateral frontal, parietal and temporal lobes. Compared with the non-NE, MNE patients showed decreased ReHo in the right inferior parietal lobe (IPL), medial  frontal cortex (MFC) and left precuneus (PCu). The NCT-A scores and serum urea levels of ESRD patients negatively correlated with ReHo values in the frontal and parietal lobes, while DST scores positively correlated with ReHo values in the bilateral PCC/precuneus, MFC and inferior parietal lobe (IPL) (all P<0.05, AlphaSim corrected). No significant correlations were found between any regional  ReHo values and disease duration, dialysis duration and serum creatinine values in ESRD patients (all P>0.05, AlphaSim corrected). CONCLUSION: Diffused decreased ReHo values were found in both MNE and non-NE patients. The progressively decreased ReHo in the default mode network (DMN), frontal and parietal lobes might be trait-related in MNE. The ReHo analysis may be potentially valuable for  elucidating neurocognitive abnormalities of ESRD patients and detecting the development from non-NE to MNE.
23990958	17	n = 17
23993991	18	n = 18	Little is known about the brain changes that mediate improvement following cognitive remediation. We used neuropsychological tests and functional magnetic resonance imaging to study working memory and recollection memory in patients with mood disorders, before (PRE) and after (POST) 10 weeks of cognitive remediation. Thirty-eight patients completed a recollection memory task at PRE (28 had complete PRE and POST scans) and 35 patients completed an n-back working  memory task at PRE (23 had complete PRE and POST scans). We also compared patients at PRE with two groups of healthy controls subjects (n=18 for the recollection memory task and n=15 for the working memory task). At PRE, compared  to controls, patients had (i) poorer backward digit span scores, (ii) lower accuracy scores and weaker frontopolar activation during the 2-back condition, and (iii) poorer recollection scores and altered medial temporal activation on the recollection memory task. Following remediation, patients (i) improved on the backward digit span, (ii) activation increased in lateral and medial prefrontal,  superior temporal, and lateral parietal regions in the 2-back condition, and (iii) recollection-related activation increased in the bilateral hippocampus. Improvements in 2-back accuracy correlated with activation increases in lateral and medial prefrontal and lateral parietal regions, and improved recollection scores correlated with activation increases in the left hippocampus. PRE-POST improvements on the backward digit span correlated with PRE-POST improvements in  2-back task accuracy; however, there was no direct association between improvement on the backward digit span following training and change in functional activation. These findings suggest that cognitive remediation may lead to behavioural improvements on tests of working memory. The relation between behavioural change and changes in functional activation following remediation requires further study.
23993991	15	n = 15
24001457	52	n = 52	While theorists have speculated that different affective traits are linked to reliable brain activity during anticipation of gains and losses, few have directly tested this prediction. We examined these associations in a community sample of healthy human adults (n=52) as they played a Monetary Incentive Delay task while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI). Factor analysis of personality measures revealed that subjects independently varied in trait Positive Arousal and trait Negative Arousal. In a subsample (n=14) retested over 2.5years later, left nucleus accumbens (NAcc) activity during anticipation of large gains (+$5.00) and right anterior insula activity during anticipation of large losses (-$5.00) showed significant test-retest reliability (intraclass correlations>0.50, p's<0.01). In the full sample (n=52), trait Positive Arousal correlated with individual differences in left NAcc activity during anticipation  of large gains, while trait Negative Arousal correlated with individual differences in right anterior insula activity during anticipation of large losses. Associations of affective traits with neural activity were not attributable to the influence of other potential confounds (including sex, age, wealth, and motion). Together, these results demonstrate selective links between  distinct affective traits and reliably-elicited activity in neural circuits associated with anticipation of gain versus loss. The findings thus reveal neural markers for affective dimensions of healthy personality, and potentially for related psychiatric symptoms.
24001457	14	n = 14
24001457	52	n = 52
24040207	22	n = 22	Ironic remarks are frequent in everyday language and represent an important form  of social cognition. Increasing evidence indicates a deficit in comprehension in  schizophrenia. Several models for defective comprehension have been proposed, including possible roles of the medial prefrontal lobe, default mode network, inferior frontal gyri, mirror neurons, right cerebral hemisphere and a possible mediating role of schizotypal personality traits. We investigated the neural correlates of irony comprehension in schizophrenia by using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In a prosody-free reading paradigm, 15 female patients with schizophrenia and 15 healthy female controls silently read ironic and literal text vignettes during fMRI. Each text vignette ended in either an ironic (n = 22) or literal (n = 22) statement. Ironic and literal text  vignettes were matched for word frequency, length, grammatical complexity, and syntax. After fMRI, the subjects performed an off-line test to detect error rate. In this test, the subjects indicated by button press whether the target sentence  has ironic, literal, or meaningless content. Schizotypal personality traits were  assessed using the German version of the schizotypal personality questionnaire (SPQ). Patients with schizophrenia made significantly more errors than did the controls (correct answers, 85.3% vs. 96.3%) on a behavioural level. Patients showed attenuated blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) response during irony comprehension mainly in right hemisphere temporal regions (ironic>literal contrast) and in posterior medial prefrontal and left anterior insula regions (for ironic>visual baseline, but not for literal>visual baseline). In patients with schizophrenia, the parahippocampal gyrus showed increased activation. Across all subjects, BOLD response in the medial prefrontal area was negatively correlated with the SPQ score. These results highlight the role of the posterior  medial prefrontal and right temporal regions in defective irony comprehension in  schizophrenia and the mediating role of schizotypal personality traits.
24040207	22	n = 22
24056237	17	n = 17	OBJECTIVE: Contrasts of verbal fluency and automatic speech provide an opportunity to evaluate the neural underpinnings of generativity and flexibility  in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). METHOD: We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to contrast brain activity in high functioning ASD (n=17, mean verbal IQ=117) and neurotypical (NT; n=20, mean verbal IQ=112) adolescent and young adult males (12-23years). Participants responded to three word generation conditions: automatic speech (reciting months), category fluency, and letter fluency. RESULTS: Our paradigm closely mirrored behavioral fluency tasks by requiring overt, free recall word generation while controlling for differences in verbal output between the groups and systematically increasing the task demand. The ASD group showed reduced neural response compared to the NT participants during fluency tasks in multiple regions of left anterior and posterior cortices, and sub-cortical structures. Six of these regions fell in cortico-striatal circuits previously linked to repetitive behaviors (Langen, Durston, Kas, van Engeland, & Staal, 2011), and activity in two of them (putamen and thalamus) was  negatively correlated with autism repetitive behavior symptoms in the ASD group.  In addition, response in left inferior frontal gyrus was differentially modulated in the ASD, relative to the NT, group as a function of task demand. CONCLUSIONS:  These data indicate a specific, atypical brain response in ASD to demanding generativity tasks that may have relevance to repetitive behavior symptoms in ASD as well as to difficulties generating original verbal responses.
24056237	20	n = 20
24058706	32	n = 32	BACKGROUND: Combat-related PTSD has been associated with reduced gray matter volume in regions of the prefrontal and temporal cortex, hippocampus, insula, and amygdala. However, the relationship between gray matter volume and specific deployment and post-deployment experiences has not been investigated. The aim of  this study was to delineate how such experiences may contribute to structural brain changes for combat veterans. METHODS: Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation Enduring Freedom veterans (N = 32) completed magnetic resonance imaging, the Deployment Risk and Resilience Inventory, Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test, and Clinical Administered PTSD Scale. Voxel-wise Huber robust multiple regressions were used to quantify the relationship between gray matter volume and deployment experiences (combat experiences, military social support) and post-deployment symptoms (PTSD, alcohol use). RESULTS: There was an interaction between severity of combat experiences and military social support for orbitofrontal gyrus gray matter volume. Specifically, individuals with more orbitofrontal gyrus gray matter volume reported less combat experiences and higher unit support. Individuals with more severe PTSD symptoms showed reduced gray matter volume within a large temporal region (inferior temporal and parahippocampal gyrus). CONCLUSIONS: The identified association between unit support and orbitofrontal gyrus volume supports two potential resilience mechanisms to be delineated with future longitudinal studies. First, individuals  with larger orbitofrontal gyrus may engage in greater quality of social interactions and thus experience combat as less stressful. Second, individuals who experience greater unit support may preserve a larger orbitofrontal gyrus, serving to "protect" them from aversive consequences of combat.
24090797	58	n = 58	BACKGROUND: Children exposed to early-life psychosocial deprivation associated with institutional rearing are at markedly elevated risk of developing attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Neurodevelopmental mechanisms that explain the high prevalence of ADHD in children exposed to institutionalization are unknown. We examined whether abnormalities in cortical thickness and subcortical volume were mechanisms explaining elevations in ADHD among children raised in institutional settings. METHODS: Data were drawn from the Bucharest Early Intervention Project, a cohort of children raised from early  infancy in institutions in Romania (n = 58) and age-matched community control subjects (n = 22). Magnetic resonance imaging data were acquired when children were aged 8 to 10 years, and ADHD symptoms were assessed using the Health and Behavior Questionnaire. RESULTS: Children reared in institutions exhibited widespread reductions in cortical thickness across prefrontal, parietal, and temporal regions relative to community control subjects. No group differences were found in the volume of subcortical structures. Reduced thickness across numerous cortical areas was associated with higher levels of ADHD symptoms. Cortical thickness in lateral orbitofrontal cortex, insula, inferior parietal cortex, precuneus, superior temporal cortex, and lingual gyrus mediated the association of institutionalization with inattention and impulsivity; additionally, supramarginal gyrus thickness mediated the association with inattention and fusiform gyrus thickness mediated the association with impulsivity. CONCLUSIONS: Severe early-life deprivation disrupts cortical development resulting in reduced thickness in regions with atypical function during attention tasks in children with ADHD, including the inferior parietal cortex, precuneus, and superior temporal cortex. These reductions in thickness are a neurodevelopmental mechanism explaining elevated ADHD symptoms in children  exposed to institutional rearing.
24090797	22	n = 22
24093010	37	n = 37	While it is well established that individuals with psychopathy have a marked deficit in affective arousal, emotional empathy, and caring for the well-being of others, the extent to which perspective taking can elicit an emotional response has not yet been studied despite its potential application in rehabilitation. In  healthy individuals, affective perspective taking has proven to be an effective means to elicit empathy and concern for others. To examine neural responses in individuals who vary in psychopathy during affective perspective taking, 121 incarcerated males, classified as high (n = 37; Hare psychopathy checklist-revised, PCL-R >/= 30), intermediate (n = 44; PCL-R between 21 and 29), and low (n = 40; PCL-R </= 20) psychopaths, were scanned while viewing stimuli depicting bodily injuries and adopting an imagine-self and an imagine-other perspective. During the imagine-self perspective, participants with high psychopathy showed a typical response within the network involved in empathy for  pain, including the anterior insula (aINS), anterior midcingulate cortex (aMCC),  supplementary motor area (SMA), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), somatosensory cortex, and right amygdala. Conversely, during the imagine-other perspective, psychopaths exhibited an atypical pattern of brain activation and effective connectivity seeded in the anterior insula and amygdala with the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). The response in the amygdala and insula was inversely correlated with PCL-R Factor 1 (interpersonal/affective) during the imagine-other perspective. In high psychopaths, scores on PCL-R Factor 1 predicted the neural response in ventral striatum when imagining others in pain. These patterns of brain activation and effective connectivity associated with differential perspective-taking provide a  better understanding of empathy dysfunction in psychopathy, and have the potential to inform intervention programs for this complex clinical problem.
24093010	44	n = 44
24093010	40	n = 40
24098688	30	n = 30	Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a clinically heterogeneous condition. Although structural brain alterations have been consistently reported in OCD, their interaction with particular clinical subtypes deserves further examination. Among other approaches, a two-group classification in patients with autogenous and reactive obsessions has been proposed. The purpose of the present study was to assess, by means of a voxel-based morphometry analysis, the putative brain structural correlates of this classification scheme in OCD patients. Ninety-five  OCD patients and 95 healthy controls were recruited. Patients were divided into autogenous (n = 30) and reactive (n = 65) sub-groups. A structural magnetic resonance image was acquired for each participant and pre-processed with SPM8 software to obtain a volume-modulated gray matter map. Whole-brain and voxel-wise comparisons between the study groups were then performed. In comparison to the autogenous group, reactive patients showed larger gray matter volumes in the right Rolandic operculum. When compared to healthy controls, reactive patients showed larger volumes in the putamen (bilaterally), while autogenous patients showed a smaller left anterior temporal lobe. Also in comparison to healthy controls, the right middle temporal gyrus was smaller in both patient subgroups.  Our results suggest that autogenous and reactive obsessions depend on partially dissimilar neural substrates. Our findings provide some neurobiological support for this classification scheme and contribute to unraveling the neurobiological basis of clinical heterogeneity in OCD.
24098688	65	n = 65
24120302	25	n = 25	While structural abnormalities of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) may  pre-date and predict psychosis onset, the relationships between functional deficits, cognitive and psychosocial impairments has yet to be explored in the at-risk period. An established measure of cognitive control (AXCPT) was administered to demographically matched clinical-high-risk (CHR; n=25), first-episode schizophrenia (FE; n=35), and healthy control (HC; n=35) participants during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate these relationships. CHR and FE individuals demonstrated impaired context processing and reduced DLPFC activation relative to HC individuals during increased cognitive control demands. FE and CHR individuals' ability to increase  DLPFC activity in response to cognitive control demands was associated with better task performance. Task performance was also associated with severity of disorganization and poverty symptoms in FE participants. These findings support more extensive studies using fMRI to examine the clinical significance of prefrontal cortical functioning in the earliest stages of psychosis.
24120302	35	n = 35
24120302	35	n = 35
24123377	23	n = 23	Cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) loops project from the cortex to the striatum, then from the striatum to the thalamus via the globus pallidus, and finally from the thalamus back to the cortex again. These loops have been implicated in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) with particular focus on the limbic CSTC loop, which encompasses the orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate cortices, as well as the ventral striatum. Resting state functional-connectivity  MRI (rs-fcMRI) studies, which examine temporal correlations in neural activity across brain regions at rest, have examined CSTC loop connectivity in patients with OCD and suggest hyperconnectivity within these loops in medicated adults with OCD. We used rs-fcMRI to examine functional connectivity within CSTC loops in unmedicated adults with OCD (n = 23) versus healthy controls (HCs) (n = 20). Contrary to prior rs-fcMRI studies in OCD patients on medications that report hyperconnectivity in the limbic CSTC loop, we found that compared with HCs, unmedicated OCD participants had reduced connectivity within the limbic CSTC loop. Exploratory analyses revealed that reduced connectivity within the limbic CSTC loop correlated with OCD symptom severity in the OCD group. Our finding of limbic loop hypoconnectivity in unmedicted OCD patients highlights the potential  confounding effects of antidepressants on connectivity measures and the value of  future examinations of the effects of pharmacological and/or behavioral treatments on limbic CSTC loop connectivity.
24123377	20	n = 20
24124576	11	n = 11	INTRODUCTION: The cerebral resting state in schizophrenia is altered, as has been demonstrated separately by electroencephalography (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) resting state networks (RSNs). Previous simultaneous EEG/fMRI findings in healthy controls suggest that a consistent spatiotemporal coupling between neural oscillations (EEG frequency correlates) and RSN activity  is necessary to organize cognitive processes optimally. We hypothesized that this coupling is disorganized in schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders, in particular regarding higher cognitive RSNs such as the default-mode (DMN) and left-working-memory network (LWMN). METHODS: Resting state was investigated in eleven patients with a schizophrenia spectrum disorder (n = 11) and matched healthy controls (n = 11) using simultaneous EEG/fMRI. The temporal association of each RSN to topographic spectral changes in the EEG was assessed by creating Covariance Maps. Group differences within, and group similarities across frequencies were estimated for the Covariance Maps. RESULTS: The coupling of EEG  frequency bands to the DMN and the LWMN respectively, displayed significant similarities that were shifted towards lower EEG frequencies in patients compared to healthy controls. CONCLUSIONS: By combining EEG and fMRI, each measuring different properties of the same pathophysiology, an aberrant relationship between EEG frequencies and altered RSNs was observed in patients. RSNs of patients were related to lower EEG frequencies, indicating functional alterations of the spatiotemporal coupling. SIGNIFICANCE: The finding of a deviant and shifted coupling between RSNs and related EEG frequencies in patients with a schizophrenia spectrum disorder is significant, as it might indicate how failures in the processing of internal and external stimuli, as commonly seen during this  symptomatology (i.e. thought disorders, hallucinations), arise.
24124576	11	n = 11
24124929	75	n = 75	BACKGROUND: Functional connectivity analyses of functional magnetic resonance imaging data are a powerful tool for characterizing brain networks and how they are disrupted in neural disorders. However, many such analyses examine only one or a small number of a priori seed regions. Studies that consider the whole brain frequently rely on anatomic atlases to define network nodes, which might result in mixing distinct activation timecourses within a single node. Here, we improve  upon previous methods by using a data-driven brain parcellation to compare connectivity profiles of dyslexic (DYS) versus nonimpaired (NI) readers in the first whole-brain functional connectivity analysis of dyslexia. METHODS: Whole-brain connectivity was assessed in children (n = 75; 43 NI, 32 DYS) and adult (n = 104; 64 NI, 40 DYS) readers. RESULTS: Compared to NI readers, DYS readers showed divergent connectivity within the visual pathway and between visual association areas and prefrontal attention areas; increased right-hemisphere connectivity; reduced connectivity in the visual word-form area  (part of the left fusiform gyrus specialized for printed words); and persistent connectivity to anterior language regions around the inferior frontal gyrus. CONCLUSIONS: Together, findings suggest that NI readers are better able to integrate visual information and modulate their attention to visual stimuli, allowing them to recognize words on the basis of their visual properties, whereas DYS readers recruit altered reading circuits and rely on laborious phonology-based "sounding out" strategies into adulthood. These results deepen our understanding of the neural basis of dyslexia and highlight the importance of synchrony between diverse brain regions for successful reading.
24124929	104	n = 104
24135133	18	n = 18	When asked to judge the membership of typical (e.g., car) vs. atypical (e.g., train) pictures of a category (e.g., vehicle), native English (N=18) and native Chinese speakers (N=18) showed distinctive patterns of brain activity despite showing similar behavioral responses. Moreover, these differences were mainly due to the amount and pervasiveness of category information linguistically embedded in the everyday names of the items in the respective languages, with important differences across languages in how pervasive category labels are embedded in item-level terms. Nonetheless, the left inferior frontal gyrus and the bilateral  medial frontal gyrus are the most consistent neural correlates of category typicality that persist across languages and linguistic cues. These data together suggest that both cross- and within-language differences in the explicitness of category information have strong effects on the nature of categorization processes performed by the brain.
24135133	18	n = 18
24155702	20	n = 20	While the literature on aberrant long-distance connectivity in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has grown fast over the past decade, little is known about local connectivity. We used regional homogeneity and local density approaches at different spatial scales to examine local connectivity in 29 children and adolescents with ASD and 29 matched typically developing participants, using resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging data. Across a total of 12 analysis pipelines, the gross pattern of between-group findings was overall stable, with local overconnectivity in the ASD group in occipital and posterior temporal regions and underconnectivity in middle/posterior cingulate, and medial  prefrontal regions. This general pattern was confirmed in secondary analyses for  low-motion subsamples (n = 20 per group), in which time series segments with >0.25 mm head motion were censored, as well as in an analysis including global signal regression. Local overconnectivity in visual regions appears consistent with preference for local over global visual processing previously reported in ASD, whereas cingulate and medial frontal underconnectivity may relate to aberrant function within the default mode network.
24165833	34	n = 34	We used surface-based morphometry to test for differences in cortical shape between children with simplex autism (n = 34, mean age 11.4 years) and typical children (n = 32, mean age 11.3 years). This entailed testing for group differences in sulcal depth and in 3D coordinates after registering cortical midthickness surfaces to an atlas target using 2 independent registration methods. We identified bilateral differences in sulcal depth in restricted portions of the anterior-insula and frontal-operculum (aI/fO) and in the temporoparietal junction (TPJ). The aI/fO depth differences are associated with and likely to be caused by a shape difference in the inferior frontal gyrus in children with simplex autism. Comparisons of average midthickness surfaces of children with simplex autism and those of typical children suggest that the significant sulcal depth differences represent local peaks in a larger pattern of regional differences that are below statistical significance when using coordinate-based analysis methods. Cortical regions that are statistically significant before correction for multiple measures are peaks of more extended, albeit subtle regional differences that may guide hypothesis generation for studies using other imaging modalities.
24165833	32	n = 32
24174207	39	n = 39	Depending on threat proximity, different defensive behaviours are mediated by a descending neural network involving forebrain (distal threat) vs midbrain areas (proximal threat). Compared to healthy subjects, it can be assumed that phobics are characterized by shortened defensive distances on a behavioural and neural level. This study aimed at characterizing defensive reactivity in two subtypes of specific phobia [snake (SP) and dental phobics (DP)]. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), n = 39 subjects (13 healthy controls, HC; 13 SP; 13 DP) underwent an event-related fMRI task employing an anticipation (5-10 s) and immediate perception phase (phobic pictures and matched neutral stimuli; 1250 ms) to modulate defensive distance. Although no differential brain activity in any comparisons was observed in DP, areas associated with defensive behaviours (e.g.  amygdala, hippocampus, midbrain) were activated in SP. Decreasing defensive distance in SP was characterized by a shift to midbrain activity. Present findings substantiate differences between phobia types in their physiological and neural organization that can be expanded to early stages of defensive behaviours. Findings may contribute to a better understanding of the dynamic organization of  defensive reactivity in different types of phobic fear.
24204812	37	n = 37	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder affecting dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra leading to dysfunctional cortico-striato-thalamic-cortical loops. In addition to the characteristic motor  symptoms, PD patients often show cognitive impairments, affective changes and other non-motor symptoms, suggesting system-wide effects on brain function. Here, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging and graph-theory based analysis methods to investigate altered whole-brain intrinsic functional connectivity in PD patients (n = 37) compared to healthy controls (n = 20). Global network properties indicated less efficient processing in PD. Analysis of brain network modules pointed to increased connectivity within the sensorimotor network, but decreased interaction of the visual network with other brain modules. We found lower connectivity mainly between the cuneus and the ventral caudate, medial orbitofrontal cortex and the temporal lobe. To identify regions of altered connectivity, we mapped the degree of intrinsic functional connectivity both on ROI- and on voxel-level across the brain. Compared to healthy controls, PD patients showed lower connectedness in the medial and middle orbitofrontal cortex. The degree of connectivity was also decreased in the occipital lobe (cuneus and calcarine), but increased in the superior parietal cortex, posterior  cingulate gyrus, supramarginal gyrus and supplementary motor area. Our results on global network and module properties indicated that PD manifests as a disconnection syndrome. This was most apparent in the visual network module. The  higher connectedness within the sensorimotor module in PD patients may be related to compensation mechanism in order to overcome the functional deficit of the striato-cortical motor loops or to loss of mutual inhibition between brain networks. Abnormal connectivity in the visual network may be related to adaptation and compensation processes as a consequence of altered motor function. Our analysis approach proved sensitive for detecting disease-related localized effects as well as changes in network functions on intermediate and global scale.
24204812	20	n = 20
24205247	21	n = 21	Antisocial behavior and aggression are prominent symptoms in several psychiatric  disorders including antisocial personality disorder. An established precursor to  aggression is a frustrating event, which can elicit anger or exasperation, thereby prompting aggressive responses. While some studies have investigated the  neural correlates of frustration and aggression, examination of their relation to trait aggression in healthy populations are rare. Based on a screening of 550 males, we formed two extreme groups, one including individuals reporting high (n=21) and one reporting low (n=18) trait aggression. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) at 3T, all participants were put through a frustration task comprising unsolvable anagrams of German nouns. Despite similar behavioral performance, males with high trait aggression reported higher ratings of negative affect and anger after the frustration task. Moreover, they showed relatively decreased activation in the frontal brain regions and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) as well as relatively less amygdala activation in response to frustration. Our findings indicate distinct frontal and limbic processing mechanisms following frustration modulated by trait aggression. In response to a frustrating event, HA individuals show some of the personality characteristics and neural processing patterns observed in abnormally aggressive  populations. Highlighting the impact of aggressive traits on the behavioral and neural responses to frustration in non-psychiatric extreme groups can facilitate  further characterization of neural dysfunctions underlying psychiatric disorders  that involve abnormal frustration processing and aggression.
24205247	18	n = 18
24209777	13	n = 13	BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) involve impairments in cognitive control. In typical development (TYP), neural systems underlying cognitive control undergo substantial maturation during adolescence. Development is delayed in adolescents with ASD. Little is known about the neural substrates of this delay. METHODS: We used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging and a cognitive control task involving overcoming a prepotent response tendency to examine the development of cognitive control in young (ages 12-15; n = 13 with ASD and n = 13 with TYP) and older (ages 16-18; n = 14 with ASD and n = 14 with TYP) adolescents with whole-brain voxelwise univariate and task-related functional connectivity analyses. RESULTS: Older ASD and TYP showed reduced activation in sensory and premotor areas relative to younger ones. The older ASD  group showed reduced left parietal activation relative to TYP. Functional connectivity analyses showed a significant age by group interaction with the older ASD group exhibiting increased functional connectivity strength between the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the anterior cingulate cortex, bilaterally. This functional connectivity strength was related to task performance in ASD, whereas that between dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and parietal cortex (Brodmann areas 9 and 40) was related to task performance in TYP. CONCLUSIONS: Adolescents  with ASD rely more on reactive cognitive control, involving last-minute conflict  detection and control implementation by the anterior cingulate cortex and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, versus proactive cognitive control requiring processing by dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and parietal cortex. Findings await  replication in larger longitudinal studies that examine their functional consequences and amenability to intervention.
24209777	13	n = 13
24209777	14	n = 14
24209777	14	n = 14
24244633	1938	n = 1938	BACKGROUND: A compulsivity spectrum has been hypothesized to exist across Obsessive-Compulsive disorder (OCD), Eating Disorders (ED), substance abuse (SA)  and binge-drinking (BD). The objective was to examine the validity of this compulsivity spectrum, and differentiate it from an externalizing behaviors dimension, but also to look at hypothesized personality and neural correlates. METHOD: A community-sample of adolescents (N=1938; mean age 14.5 years), and their parents were recruited via high-schools in 8 European study sites. Data on  adolescents' psychiatric symptoms, DSM diagnoses (DAWBA) and substance use behaviors (AUDIT and ESPAD) were collected through adolescent- and parent-reported questionnaires and interviews. The phenotypic structure of compulsive behaviors was then tested using structural equation modeling. The model was validated using personality variables (NEO-FFI and TCI), and Voxel-Based Morphometry (VBM) analysis. RESULTS: Compulsivity symptoms best fit a higher-order two factor model, with ED and OCD loading onto a compulsivity factor, and BD and SA loading onto an externalizing factor, composed also of ADHD and conduct disorder symptoms. The compulsivity construct correlated with neuroticism (r=0.638; p </= 0.001), conscientiousness (r=0.171; p </= 0.001), and brain gray matter volume in left and right orbitofrontal cortex, right ventral striatum and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The externalizing factor correlated with extraversion (r=0.201; p </= 0.001), novelty-seeking (r=0.451; p  </= 0.001), and negatively with gray matter volume in the left inferior and middle frontal gyri. CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that a compulsivity spectrum exists in an adolescent, preclinical sample and accounts for variance in both OCD and ED, but not substance-related behaviors, and can be differentiated from an externalizing spectrum.
24260420	34	n = 34	The purpose of the present study was the investigation of interaction effects between functional MRI scanner noise and affective neural processes. Stimuli comprised of psychoacoustically balanced musical pieces, expressing three different emotions (fear, neutral, joy). Participants (N=34, 19 female) were split into two groups, one subjected to continuous scanning and another subjected to sparse temporal scanning that features decreased scanner noise. Tests for interaction effects between scanning group (sparse/quieter vs continuous/noisier) and emotion (fear, neutral, joy) were performed. Results revealed interactions between the affective expression of stimuli and scanning group localized in bilateral auditory cortex, insula and visual cortex (calcarine sulcus). Post-hoc  comparisons revealed that during sparse scanning, but not during continuous scanning, BOLD signals were significantly stronger for joy than for fear, as well as stronger for fear than for neutral in bilateral auditory cortex. During continuous scanning, but not during sparse scanning, BOLD signals were significantly stronger for joy than for neutral in the left auditory cortex and for joy than for fear in the calcarine sulcus. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first study to show a statistical interaction effect between scanner noise and affective processes and extends evidence suggesting scanner noise to be an important factor in functional MRI research that can affect and distort affective brain processes.
24269802	25	n = 25	Individual participants vary greatly in their ability to estimate and discriminate intervals of time. This heterogeneity of performance may be caused by reliance on different time perception networks as well as individual differences in the activation of brain structures utilized for timing within those networks. To address these possibilities we utilized event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while human participants (n=25) performed a temporal or color discrimination task. Additionally, based on our previous research, we genotyped participants for DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a, a single-nucleotide polymorphism associated with a 30-40% reduction in striatal D2  density and associated with poorer timing performance. Similar to previous reports, a wide range of performance was found across our sample; crucially, better performance on the timing versus color task was associated with greater activation in prefrontal and sub-cortical regions previously associated with timing. Furthermore, better timing performance also correlated with increased volume of the right lateral cerebellum, as demonstrated by voxel-based morphometry. Our analysis also revealed that A1 carriers of the Taq1a polymorphism exhibited relatively worse performance on temporal, but not color discrimination, but greater activation in the striatum and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, as well as reduced volume in the cerebellar cluster. These results point to the neural bases for heterogeneous timing performance in humans, and suggest that differences in performance on a temporal discrimination task are, in part, attributable to the DRD2/ANKK1 genotype.
24298242	184	n = 184	Problems associated with stimulant use have been linked to frontocingulate, insular, and thalamic dysfunction during decision making and alterations in interoceptive processing. However, little is known about how interoception and decision making interact and contribute to dysfunctions that promote the transition from recreational drug use to abuse or dependence. Here, we investigate brain activation in response to reward, punishment, and uncertainty during an aversive interoceptive challenge in current and former stimulant (cocaine and amphetamine) users using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Young adults previously identified as recreational users (n = 184) were followed up 3 years later. Of these, 18 individuals progressed to problem stimulant use (PSU), whereas 15 desisted stimulant use (DSU). PSU, DSU, and 14 healthy comparison subjects (CTL) performed a two-choice prediction task at three fixed error rates (20% = reward, 50% = uncertainty, 80% = punishment) during which they anticipated and experienced episodes of inspiratory breathing load. Although groups did not differ in insula activation or subjective breathing load  ratings, PSU exhibited lower right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and bilateral anterior cingulate (ACC) activation than DSU and CTL during aversive interoceptive processing as well as lower right IFG in response to decision making involving uncertainty. However, PSU exhibited greater bilateral IFG activation than DSU and CTL while making choices within the context of punishing  feedback, and both PSU and DSU showed lower thalamic activation during breathing  load than CTL. Findings suggest that frontocingulate attenuation, reflecting reduced resources devoted to goal maintenance and action selection in the presence of uncertainty and interoceptive perturbations, may be a biomarker for susceptibility to PSU.
24300085	18	n = 18	Cortical areas supporting cognitive control and salience demonstrate different neural responses to visual food cues in patients with eating disorders. This top-down cognitive control, which interacts with bottom-up appetitive responses,  is tightly integrated not only in task conditions but also in the resting-state.  The dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) is a key node of a large-scale network that is involved in self-referential processing and cognitive control. We investigated resting-state functional connectivity of the dACC and hypothesized that altered connectivity would be demonstrated in cortical midline structures involved in self-referential processing and cognitive control. Seed-based resting-state functional connectivity was analyzed in women with anorexia nervosa (N=18), women with bulimia nervosa (N=20) and age matched healthy controls (N=20). Between group comparisons revealed that the anorexia nervosa group exhibited stronger synchronous activity between the dACC and retrosplenial cortex, whereas the bulimia nervosa group showed stronger synchronous activity between the dACC and medial orbitofrontal cortex. Both groups demonstrated stronger synchronous activity between the dACC and precuneus, which correlated with higher scores of the Body Shape Questionnaire. The dACC-precuneus resting-state synchrony might be associated with the disorder-specific rumination on eating, weight and body shape in patients with eating disorders.
24300085	20	n = 20
24300085	20	n = 20
24302681	16	n = 16	The neurosteroids allopregnanolone and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) are integral components of the stress response and exert positive modulatory effects on emotion in both human and animal studies. Although these antidepressant and anxiolytic effects have been well established, to date, little research has examined their neural correlates, and no research has been conducted into the effects of neurosteroids on large-scale networks at rest. To investigate the neurosteroid impact on intrinsic connectivity networks, participants were administered 400 mg of pregnenolone (N = 16), 400 mg of DHEA (N = 14), or placebo (N = 15) and underwent 3T fMRI. Resting-state brain connectivity was measured using amygdala as a seed region. When compared with placebo, pregnenolone administration reduced connectivity between amygdala and dorsal medial prefrontal cortex, between amygdala and precuneus, and between amygdala and hippocampus. DHEA reduced connectivity between amygdala and periamygdala and between amygdala  and insula. Reductions in amygdala to precuneus connectivity were associated with less self-reported negative affect. These results demonstrate that neurosteroids  modulate amygdala functional connectivity during resting state and may be a target for pharmacological intervention. Additionally, allopregnanolone and DHEA  may shift the balance between salience network and default network, a finding that could provide insight into the neurocircuitry of anxiety psychopathology. Hum Brain Mapp, 2013. (c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
24302681	14	n = 14
24302681	15	n = 15
24312382	18	n = 18	BACKGROUND: The reward value of food is partly dependent on learned associations. It is not yet known whether replacing sugar with non-caloric sweeteners in food is affecting long-term acceptance. OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of replacing sugar with non-caloric sweeteners in a nutrient-empty drink (soft drink) versus nutrient-rich drink (yoghurt drink) on reward value after repeated  exposure. DESIGN: We used a randomized crossover design whereby forty subjects (15 men, 25 women) with a mean +/- SD age of 21 +/- 2 y and BMI of 21.5 +/- 1.7 kg/m(2) consumed a fixed portion of a non-caloric sweetened (NS) and sugar sweetened (SS) versions of either a soft drink or a yoghurt drink (counterbalanced) for breakfast which were distinguishable by means of colored labels. Each version of a drink was offered 10 times in semi-random order. Before and after conditioning the reward value of the drinks was assessed using behavioral tasks on wanting, liking, and expected satiety. In a subgroup (n=18) fMRI was performed to assess brain reward responses to the drinks. RESULTS: Outcomes of both the behavioral tasks and fMRI showed that conditioning did not affect the reward value of the NS and SS versions of the drinks significantly. Overall, subjects preferred the yoghurt drinks to the soft drinks and the ss drinks to the NS drinks. In addition, they expected the yoghurt drinks to be more satiating, they reduced hunger more, and delayed the first eating episode more. Conditioning did not influence these effects. CONCLUSION: Our study showed that repeated consumption of a non-caloric sweetened beverage, instead of a sugar sweetened version, appears not to result in changes in the reward value. It cannot be ruled out that learned associations between sensory attributes and food satiating capacity which developed preceding the conditioning period, during lifetime, affected the reward value of the drinks.
24316238	9	n = 9	Non-arbitrary correspondences between spoken words and categories of meanings exist in natural language, with mounting evidence that listeners are sensitive to this sound symbolic information. Native English speakers were asked to choose the meaning of spoken foreign words from one of four corresponding antonym pairs selected from a previously developed multi-language stimulus set containing both  sound symbolic and non-symbolic stimuli. In behavioral (n=9) and fMRI (n=15) experiments, participants showed reliable sensitivity to the sound symbolic properties of the stimulus set, selecting the consistent meaning for the sound symbolic words at above chances rates. There was increased activation for sound symbolic relative to non-symbolic words in left superior parietal cortex, and a cluster in left superior longitudinal fasciculus showed a positive correlation between fractional anisotropy (FA) and an individual's sensitivity to sound symbolism. These findings support the idea that crossmodal correspondences underlie sound symbolism in spoken language.
24316238	15	n = 15
24321557	151	n = 151	Human memory is a highly heritable polygenic trait with complex inheritance patterns. To study the genetics of memory and memory-related diseases, hippocampal functioning has served as an intermediate phenotype. The importance of investigating gene-gene effects on complex phenotypes has been emphasized, but most imaging studies still focus on single polymorphisms. APOE epsilon4 and BDNF  Met, two of the most studied gene variants for variability in memory performance  and neuropsychiatric disorders, have both separately been related to poorer episodic memory and altered hippocampal functioning. Here, we investigated the combined effect of APOE and BDNF on hippocampal activation (N=151). No non-additive interaction effects were seen. Instead, the results revealed decreased activation in bilateral hippocampus and parahippocampus as a function of the number of APOE epsilon4 and BDNF Met alleles present (neither, one, or both). The combined effect was stronger than either of the individual effects, and both gene variables explained significant proportions of variance in BOLD signal change. Thus, there was an additive gene-gene effect of APOE and BDNF on medial temporal lobe (MTL) activation, showing that a larger proportion of variance in brain activation attributed to genetics can be explained by considering more than one gene variant. This effect might be relevant for the understanding of normal variability in memory function as well as memory-related  disorders associated with APOE and BDNF.
24332890	17	n = 17	Recent studies suggest that pharmacologic effects of anxiolytic agents can be mapped as functional changes in the fear, stress and anxiety brain circuit. In this work we investigated the effects of a standard treatment, paroxetine (20mg/day), in subjects with Social Anxiety Disorder (SAD) versus placebo using different fMRI paradigms. The fMRI sessions, performed before and after the treatment, consisted of a public exposition of recorded performance task (PERPT), an emotional face processing task (EFPT) and a 6-min resting state followed by an off-scanner public speaking test. Paroxetine significantly improved the clinical  conditions of SAD patients (n=17) vs. placebo (n=16) as measured with Clinical Global Inventory - Improvement (CGI-I) while no change was seen when using Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale, as expected given the small size of the study population. Paroxetine reduced the activation of insula, thalamus and subgenual/anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) in PERPT. Resting-state fMRI assessment using Independent Component Analysis indicated that paroxetine reduced functional connectivity in insula, thalamus and ACC when compared with placebo. Both paradigms showed significant correlation with CGI-I in rostral prefrontal cortex. Conversely, paroxetine compared to placebo produced activation of right amygdala  and bilateral insula and no effects in ACC when tested with EFPT. No treatment effects on distress scores were observed in the off-scanner Public Speaking Test. Overall this study supports the use of fMRI as sensitive approach to explore the  neurobiological substrate of the effects of pharmacologic treatments and, in particular, of resting state fMRI given its simplicity and task independence.
24332890	16	n = 16
24357099	16	n = 16	Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used in a non-patient experimental sample to assess the neuroanatomical dissociation of picture and description naming (PN and DN) in temporal lobe (TL). The purpose was to determine the generalizability of findings in semantic organization in the epilepsy patient population to the broader population. It was hypothesized that,  akin to patient derived findings, DN would uniquely activate left TL regions anterior to those associated with PN, while overlapping in middle and posterior left TL. Participants (n = 16) underwent fMRI while silently naming target words  during a picture naming task (PNT; line drawings) and description naming task (DNT; orthographic phrases). Analysis was a priori restricted to the left TL. Group results of direct contrasts (DNT > PNT and PNT > DNT) confirmed the hypothesized dissociation with DNT > PNT activating anterior left TL. Within-condition contrasts (DNT and PNT alone) yielded additional support, revealing areas of shared and unique activation in each condition. This is the first imaging study to contrast DN and PN in the same sample. The results suggest DN and PN are meaningfully different constructs subserved by converging and diverging TL neuroanatomy and may be differentially affected by disease.
24367494	33	n = 33	Although the functional brain network involved in reading for adults and children is now well documented, a critical lack of knowledge still exists about the structural development of these brain areas. To provide a better overview of the  structural dynamics of the brain that sustain reading acquisition, we acquired anatomical MRI brain images from 55 children that were divided into two groups: one prior to the formal learning of reading (n = 33, 5-6 years old) and the second a few years after formal learning (n = 22, 9-10 years old). Reading performances were collected based on the "Alouette-R" test, a standardized test for reading text in French. Voxel-based morphometry analysis of gray matter showed that only the right insula volume was different between the two groups. Moreover, the reading group showed that the volumes of the left fusiform gyrus (corresponding to the well-known visual word form area, VWFA), the anterior part  of the left inferior occipital gyrus and the left thalamus were significantly modulated by reading performance. This study reinforces the crucial role of the Visual Word Form Area in reading and correlation analyses performed between ROIs  volumes suggesting that the VWFA is fully connected with the traditional left-hemispheric language brain network.
24367494	22	n = 22
24375710	25	n = 25	The development of language, social interaction, and communicative skills are remarkably different in the child with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Atypical brain connectivity has frequently been reported in this patient population. However, the interplay between their brain connectivity and language performance  remains largely understudied. Using diffusion tensor imaging tractography and resting-state fMRI, the authors explored the structural and functional connectivity of the language network and its relation to the language profile in  a group of healthy control subjects (N = 25) and a group of children with ASD (N  = 17). The authors hypothesized that in children with ASD, a neural connectivity  deficit of the language network can be related to the observed abnormal language  function. They found an absence of the right-hemispheric arcuate fascicle (AF) in 28% (7/25) of the healthy control children and in 59% (10/17) of the children with ASD. In contrast to healthy control children, the absence of the right-hemispheric AF in children with autism was related to a lower language performance as indicated by a lower verbal IQ, lower scores on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, and lower language scores on the Dutch version of the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (CELF-4NL). In addition, through iterative fMRI data analyses, the language impairment of children with ASD could  be linked to a marked loss of intrahemispheric functional connectivity between inferior frontal and superior temporal regions, known as the cortical language network. Both structural and functional underconnectivity patterns coincide and are related to an abnormal language function in children with ASD. Hum Brain Mapp, 2013. (c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
24375710	17	n = 17
24381276	30	n = 30	Despite extensive research on inhibitory control (IC) and its neural systems, the questions of whether IC can be improved with training and how the associated neural systems change are understudied. Behavioral evidence suggests that performance on IC tasks improves with training but that these gains do not transfer to other tasks, and almost nothing is known about how activation in IC-related brain regions changes with training. Human participants were randomly  assigned to receive IC training (N = 30) on an adaptive version of the stop-signal task (SST) or an active sham-training (N = 30) during 10 sessions across 3 weeks. Neural activation during the SST before and after training was assessed in both groups using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Performance  on the SST improved significantly more in the training group than in the control  group. The pattern of neuroimaging results was consistent with a proactive control model such that activity in key parts of the IC network shifted earlier in time within the trial, becoming associated with cues that anticipated the upcoming need for IC. Specifically, activity in the inferior frontal gyrus decreased during the implementation of control (i.e., stopping) and increased during cues that preceded the implementation of IC from pretraining to post-training. Also, steeper behavioral improvement in the training group correlated with activation increases during the cue phase and decreases during implementation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. These results are the first to uncover the neural pathways for training-related improvements in IC and can explain previous null findings of IC training transfer.
24381276	30	n = 30
24381810	14	n = 14	Schizophrenia (SZ) is associated with a reduced ability to set meaningful goals to reach desired outcomes. The delay-discounting (DD) task, in which one chooses  between sooner smaller and later larger rewards, has proven useful in revealing executive function and reward deficits in various clinical groups. We used fMRI in patients with SZ and healthy controls (HC) to compare brain activation during  performance of a DD task. Prior to the neuroimaging session, we obtained each participant's rate of DD, k, on a DD task and used it to select a version of the  DD task for each participant's fMRI session. Because of the importance of comparing fMRI results from groups matched on performance, we used a criterion value of R (2) > 0.60 for response consistency on the DD task to analyze fMRI activation to DD task versus control trials from consistent SZ (n = 14) and consistent HC (n = 14). We also compared activation between the groups on contrasts related to trial difficulty. Finally, we contrasted the inconsistent SZ (n = 9) with the consistent HC and consistent SZ; these results should be interpreted with caution because of inconsistent SZ's aberrant performance on the task. Compared with consistent HC, consistent SZ showed reduced activation to DD  task versus control trials in executive function and reward areas. In contrast, consistent SZ showed more activation in the precuneus and posterior cingulate, regions of the default mode network (DMN) that are typically deactivated during tasks, and in the insula, a region linked to emotional processing. Furthermore, consistent SZ had abnormal activation of lateral and medial frontal regions in relation to trial difficulty. These results point to disruption of several neural networks during decision making, including the executive, reward, default mode, and emotional networks, and suggest processes that are impaired during decision making in schizophrenia.
24381810	14	n = 14
24381810	9	n = 9
24399958	12	n = 12	Enhanced memory for emotional faces is a significant component of adaptive social interactions, but little is known on its neural developmental correlates. We explored the role of amygdaloid complex (AC) and medial temporal lobe (MTL) in emotional memory recognition across development, by comparing fMRI activations of successful memory encoding of fearful and neutral faces in children (n = 12; 8-12 years) and adolescents (n = 12; 13-17 years). Memory for fearful faces was enhanced compared with neutral ones in adolescents, as opposed to children. In adolescents, activations associated with successful encoding of fearful faces were centered on baso-lateral AC nuclei, hippocampus, enthorhinal and parahippocampal cortices. In children, successful encoding of fearful faces relied on activations of centro-mesial AC nuclei, which was not accompanied by functional activation of MTL memory structures. Successful encoding of neutral faces depended on activations in anterior MTL region (hippocampal head and body)  in adolescents, but more posterior ones (hippocampal tail and parahippocampal cortex) in children. In conclusion, two distinct functional specializations emerge from childhood to adolescence and result in the enhancement of memory for  these particular stimuli: the specialization of baso-lateral AC nuclei, which is  associated with the expertise in processing emotional facial expression, and which is intimately related to the specialization of MTL memory network. How the  interplay between specialization of AC nuclei and of MTL memory structures is fundamental for the edification of social interactions remains to be elucidated.
24399958	12	n = 12
24411473	59	n = 59	BACKGROUND: Variation in CACNA1C has consistently been associated with psychiatric disease in genome-wide association studies. We have previously shown  that healthy carriers of the CACNA1C rs1006737 risk variant exhibit hippocampal and perigenual anterior cingulate (pgACC) dysfunction during episodic memory recall. To test whether this brain systems-level abnormality is a potential intermediate phenotype for psychiatric disorder, we studied unaffected relatives  of patients with bipolar disorder, major depression, and schizophrenia. METHODS:  The study population comprised 188 healthy first-degree relatives of patients with bipolar disorder (n = 59), major depression (n = 73), and schizophrenia (n = 56) and 110 comparison subjects from our discovery study who were genotyped for rs1006737 and underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while performing an episodic memory task and psychological testing. Group comparisons were analyzed using SPM8 and PASW Statistics 20. RESULTS: Similar to risk allele carriers in the discovery sample, relatives of index patients exhibited hippocampal and pgACC dysfunction as well as increased scores in depression and anxiety measures, correlating negatively with hippocampal activation. Carrying the rs1006737 risk variant resulted in a stronger decrease of hippocampal and pgACC activation in relatives, indicating an additive effect of CACNA1C variation on familial risk. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings implicate abnormal perigenual and hippocampal activation as a promising intermediate phenotype for psychiatric disease and suggest a pathophysiologic mechanism conferred by a CACNA1C variant being implicated in risk for symptom dimensions shared among bipolar disorder, major depression, and schizophrenia.
24411473	73	n = 73
24411473	56	n = 56
24412399	33	n = 33	Cluster-extent based thresholding is currently the most popular method for multiple comparisons correction of statistical maps in neuroimaging studies, due  to its high sensitivity to weak and diffuse signals. However, cluster-extent based thresholding provides low spatial specificity; researchers can only infer that there is signal somewhere within a significant cluster and cannot make inferences about the statistical significance of specific locations within the cluster. This poses a particular problem when one uses a liberal cluster-defining primary threshold (i.e., higher p-values), which often produces large clusters spanning multiple anatomical regions. In such cases, it is impossible to reliably infer which anatomical regions show true effects. From a survey of 814 functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies published in 2010 and 2011, we show that the use of liberal primary thresholds (e.g., p<.01) is endemic, and that the largest determinant of the primary threshold level is the default option in the software used. We illustrate the problems with liberal primary thresholds using an fMRI dataset from our laboratory (N=33), and present simulations demonstrating the detrimental effects of liberal primary thresholds on false positives, localization, and interpretation of fMRI findings. To avoid these pitfalls, we recommend several analysis and reporting procedures, including 1) setting primary p<.001 as a default lower limit; 2) using more stringent primary thresholds or voxel-wise correction methods for highly powered studies; and 3) adopting reporting practices that make the level of spatial precision transparent to readers. We also suggest alternative and supplementary analysis methods.
24453190	16	n = 16	The action observation network (AON) is supposed to play a crucial role when athletes anticipate the effect of others' actions in sports such as tennis. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to explore whether motor expertise leads to a differential activation pattern within the AON during effect anticipation and whether spatial and motor anticipation tasks are associated with a differential activation pattern within the AON depending on participant expertise level. Expert (N = 16) and novice (N = 16) tennis players observed video clips depicting forehand strokes with the instruction to either indicate the predicted direction of ball flight (spatial anticipation) or to decide on an  appropriate response to the observed action (motor anticipation). The experts performed better than novices on both tennis anticipation tasks, with the experts showing stronger neural activation in areas of the AON, namely, the superior parietal lobe, the intraparietal sulcus, the inferior frontal gyrus, and the cerebellum. When novices were contrasted with experts, motor anticipation resulted in stronger activation of the ventral premotor cortex, the supplementary motor area, and the superior parietal lobe than spatial anticipation task did. In experts, the comparison of motor and spatial anticipation revealed no increased activation. We suggest that the stronger activation of areas in the AON during the anticipation of action effects in experts reflects their use of the more fine-tuned motor representations they have acquired and improved during years of  training. Furthermore, results suggest that the neural processing of different anticipation tasks depends on the expertise level. Hum Brain Mapp, 2014. (c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
24453190	16	n = 16
24454814	25	n = 25	BACKGROUND: Why are some people happier than others? This question has intrigued  many researchers. However, limited work has addressed this question within a neuroscientific framework. METHODS: The present study investigated the neural correlates of trait happiness using the resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) approach. Specifically, regional homogeneity (ReHo) was examined on two groups of young adults: happy and unhappy individuals (N = 25 per group). RESULTS: Decreased ReHo in unhappy relative to happy individuals was  observed within prefrontal cortex, medial temporal lobe, superior temporal lobe,  and retrosplenial cortex. In contrast, increased ReHo in unhappy relative to happy individuals was observed within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, middle  cingulate gyrus, putamen, and thalamus. In addition, the ReHo within the left thalamus was negatively correlated with Chinese Happiness Inventory (CHI) score within the happy group. LIMITATIONS: As an exploratory study, we examined how general trait happiness is reflected in the regional homogeneity of intrinsic brain activity in a relatively small sample. Examining other types of happiness in a larger sample using a multitude of intrinsic brain activity indices are warranted for future work. CONCLUSIONS: The local synchronization of BOLD signal  is altered in unhappy individuals. The regions implicated in this alteration partly overlapped with previously identified default mode network, emotional circuitry, and rewarding system, suggesting that these systems may be involved in happiness.
24454951	9	n = 9	Different people make different responses when they face a frustrating situation: some punish others (extrapunitive), while others punish themselves (intropunitive). Few studies have investigated the neural structures that differentiate extrapunitive and intropunitive individuals. The present fMRI study explored these neural structures using two different frustrating situations: an ego-blocking situation which blocks a desire or goal, and a superego-blocking situation which blocks self-esteem. In the ego-blocking condition, the extrapunitive group (n = 9) showed greater activation in the bilateral ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, indicating that these individuals prefer emotional processing. On the other hand, the intropunitive group (n = 9) showed greater activation in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, possibly reflecting an effortful control for anger reduction. Such patterns were not observed in the superego-blocking condition. These results indicate that the prefrontal cortex is the source of individual differences in aggression direction in the ego-blocking situation.
24454951	9	n = 9
24462962	22	n = 22	BACKGROUND: Social cognition is an important aspect of social behavior in humans. Social cognitive deficits are associated with neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders. In this study we examine the neural substrates of social cognition and face processing in a group of healthy young adults to examine the neural substrates of social cognition. METHODS: Fifty-seven undergraduates completed a battery of social cognition tasks and were assessed with electroencephalography (EEG) during a face-perception task. A subset (N=22)  were administered a face-perception task during functional magnetic resonance imaging. RESULTS: Variance in the N170 EEG was predicted by social attribution performance and by a quantitative measure of empathy. Neurally, face processing was more bilateral in females than in males. Variance in fMRI voxel count in the  face-sensitive fusiform gyrus was predicted by quantitative measures of social behavior, including the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) and the Empathizing Quotient. CONCLUSIONS: When measured as a quantitative trait, social behaviors in typical and pathological populations share common neural pathways. The results highlight the importance of viewing neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders as spectrum phenomena that may be informed by studies of the normal distribution of relevant traits in the general population.
24465375	181	n = 181	BACKGROUND: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) links learning, memory and cognitive decline in elderly, but evidence linking BDNF allele variation, cognition and brain structural differences is lacking. METHODS: 367 elderly Swedish men (n = 181) and women (n = 186) from Prospective Investigation of the Vasculature in Uppsala seniors (PIVUS) were genotyped and the BDNF functional rs6265 SNP was further examined in subjects who completed the Trail Making Task (TMT), verbal fluency task, and had a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) examined brain structure, cognition and links with  BDNF. RESULTS: The functional BDNF SNP (rs6265,) predicted better working memory  performance on the TMT with positive association of the Met rs6265, and was linked with greater cerebellar, precuneus, left superior frontal gyrus and bilateral hippocampal volume, and reduced brainstem and bilateral posterior cingulate volumes. CONCLUSIONS: The functional BDNF polymorphism influences brain volume in regions associated with memory and regulation of sensorimotor control,  with the Met rs6265 allele potentially being more beneficial to these functions in the elderly.
24465375	186	n = 186
24465445	21	n = 21	It has been proposed that disgust evolved to protect humans from contamination. Through eliciting the overwhelming urge to withdraw from the disgusting stimuli,  it would facilitate avoidance of contact with pathogens. The physical proximity implied in sexual intercourse provides ample opportunity for contamination and may thus set the stage for eliciting pathogen disgust. Building on this, it has been argued that the involuntary muscle contraction characteristic of vaginismus  (i.e., inability to have vaginal penetration) may be elicited by the prospect of  penetration by potential contaminants. To further investigate this disgust-based  interpretation of vaginismus (in DSM-5 classified as a Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder, GPPPD) we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine if women with vaginismus (n = 21) show relatively strong convergence in their brain responses towards sexual penetration- and disgust-related pictures compared to sexually asymptomatic women (n = 21) and women suffering from vulvar pain (dyspareunia/also classified as GPPPD in the DSM-5, n = 21). At the subjective level, both clinical groups rated penetration stimuli as more disgusting than asymptomatic women. However, the brain responses  to penetration stimuli did not differ between groups. In addition, there was considerable conjoint brain activity in response to penetration and disgust pictures, which yield for both animal-reminder (e.g., mutilation) and core (e.g., rotten food) disgust domains. However, this overlap in brain activation was similar for all groups. A possible explanation for the lack of vaginismus-specific brain responses lies in the alleged female ambiguity (procreation/pleasure vs. contamination/disgust) toward penetration: generally in women a (default) disgust response tendency may prevail in the absence of sexual  readiness. Accordingly, a critical next step would be to examine the processing of penetration stimuli following the induction of sexual arousal.
24465445	21	n = 21
24465445	21	n = 21
24473101	17	n = 17	Inhibitory response control has been extensively investigated in both electrophysiological (ERP) and hemodynamic (fMRI) studies. However, very few multimodal results address the coupling of these inhibition markers. In fMRI, response inhibition has been most consistently linked to activation of the anterior insula and inferior frontal cortex (IFC), often also the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). ERP work has established increased N2 and P3 amplitudes during NoGo compared to Go conditions in most studies. Previous simultaneous EEG-fMRI imaging reported association of the N2/P3 complex with activation of areas like the anterior midcingulate cortex (aMCC) and anterior insula. In this study we investigated inhibitory control in 23 healthy young adults (mean age=24.7, n=17 for EEG during fMRI) using a combined Flanker/NoGo task during simultaneous EEG and fMRI recording. Separate fMRI and ERP analysis yielded higher activation in the anterior insula, IFG and ACC as well as increased N2 and P3 amplitudes during NoGo trials in accordance with the literature. Combined analysis modelling sequential N2 and P3 effects through joint parametric modulation revealed correlation of higher N2 amplitude with deactivation in parts of the default mode network (DMN) and the cingulate motor area (CMA) as well as correlation of higher central P3 amplitude with activation of the left anterior insula, IFG and posterior cingulate. The EEG-fMRI results resolve the localizations of these sequential activations. They suggest a general role for allocation of attentional resources and motor inhibition for N2 and link memory recollection and internal reflection to P3 amplitude, in addition to previously described response inhibition as reflected by the anterior insula.
24475078	8	n = 8	After stroke, white matter integrity can be affected both locally and distally to the primary lesion location. It has been shown that tract disruption in mirror's  regions of the contralateral hemisphere is associated with degree of functional impairment. Fourteen patients suffering right hemispheric focal stroke (S) and eighteen healthy controls (HC) underwent Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) and neuropsychological assessment. The stroke patient group was divided into poor (SP; n = 8) and good (SG; n = 6) cognitive recovery groups according to their cognitive improvement from the acute phase (72 hours after stroke) to the subacute phase (3 months post-stroke). Whole-brain DWI data analysis was performed by computing Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) followed by Tract Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS). Assessment of effects was obtained computing the correlation of the projections on TBSS skeleton of Fractional Anisotropy (FA) and Radial Diffusivity (RD) with cognitive test results. Significant decrease of FA was found only in right brain anatomical areas for the S group when compared to the HC group. Analyzed separately, stroke patients with poor cognitive recovery showed additional significant FA decrease in several left hemisphere regions; whereas SG patients showed significant decrease only in the left genu of corpus callosum when compared to the HC. For the SG group, whole brain analysis revealed significant correlation between the performance in the Semantic Fluency test and  the FA in the right hemisphere as well as between the performance in the Grooved  Pegboard Test (GPT) and the Trail Making Test-part A and the FA in the left hemisphere. For the SP group, correlation analysis revealed significant correlation between the performance in the GPT and the FA in the right hemisphere.
24475078	6	n = 6
24493840	194	n = 194	Childhood emotional maltreatment (CEM) has adverse effects on medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) morphology, a structure that is crucial for cognitive functioning and (emotional) memory and which modulates the limbic system. In addition, CEM has been linked to amygdala hyperactivity during emotional face processing. However, no study has yet investigated the functional neural correlates of neutral and emotional memory in adults reporting CEM. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we investigated CEM-related differential activations in mPFC during the encoding and recognition of positive, negative and neutral words. The  sample (N = 194) consisted of patients with depression and/or anxiety disorders and healthy controls (HC) reporting CEM (n = 96) and patients and HC reporting no abuse (n = 98). We found a consistent pattern of mPFC hypoactivation during encoding and recognition of positive, negative and neutral words in individuals reporting CEM. These results were not explained by psychopathology or severity of depression or anxiety symptoms, or by gender, level of neuroticism, parental psychopathology, negative life events, antidepressant use or decreased mPFC volume in the CEM group. These findings indicate mPFC hypoactivity in individuals reporting CEM during emotional and neutral memory encoding and recognition. Our findings suggest that CEM may increase individuals' risk to the development of psychopathology on differential levels of processing in the brain; blunted mPFC activation during higher order processing and enhanced amygdala activation during automatic/lower order emotion processing. These findings are vital in understanding the long-term consequences of CEM.
24493840	96	n = 96
24493840	98	n = 98
24493842	29	n = 29	Behavioral studies suggest a relationship between autobiographical memory, rumination and depression. The objective of this study was to determine whether remitted depressed patients show alterations in connectivity of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC, a node in the default mode network) with the parahippocampal gyri (PHG, a region associated with autobiographical memory) while intensively recalling negative memories and whether this is related to daily life symptoms and to the further course of depression. Sad mood was induced with keywords of personal negative life events in participants with remitted depression (n = 29) and matched healthy controls (n = 29) during functional magnetic resonance imaging. Additionally, daily life assessments of mood and rumination and a 6-month follow-up were conducted. Remitted depressed participants showed greater connectivity than healthy controls of the PCC with the PHG, which was even stronger in patients with more previous episodes. Furthermore, patients with increased PCC-PHG connectivity showed a sadder mood and more rumination in daily life and a worsening of rumination and depression scores during follow-up. A relationship of negative autobiographical memory processing, rumination, sad mood and depression on a neural level seems likely. The identified increased connectivity probably indicates a 'scar' of recurrent depression and may represent a prognostic factor for future depression.
24493842	29	n = 29
24508205	27	n = 27	We hypothesized that psychomotor disturbances in patients with bipolar disorder are associated with morphometric changes in functionally specific regions of the  basal ganglia and thalamus. We used structural magnetic resonance imaging and vertex-based morphometry to investigate whether psychomotor performance is associated with changes in volume and shape in euthymic subjects with bipolar disorder (n=27) compared with matched healthy controls (n=27). We saw no significant differences between age- and sex-matched groups in motor performance. We found a statistically significant group difference in the shape of the right putamen in the absence of psychomotor disturbances. There was an association between shape and motor performance in controls that was lacking in patients. We  conclude that euthymic subjects with bipolar disorder without psychomotor disturbances show shape changes in regions of the right putamen that contribute to executive functions and motor function. It may be that other brain regions sustain the psychomotor functions that produce nearly identical motor performance in both groups.
24508205	27	n = 27
24510765	22	n = 22	Substance use disorders (SUD) have been associated with dysfunction in reward processing, habit formation, and cognitive-behavioral control. Accordingly, neurocircuitry models of addiction highlight roles for nucleus accumbens, dorsal  striatum, and prefrontal/anterior cingulate cortex. However, the precise nature of the disrupted interactions between these brain regions in SUD, and the psychological correlates thereof, remain unclear. Here we used magnetic resonance imaging to measure rest-state functional connectivity of three key striatal nuclei (nucleus accumbens, dorsal caudate, and dorsal putamen) in a sample of 40  adult male prison inmates (n = 22 diagnosed with SUD; n = 18 without SUD). Relative to the non-SUD group, the SUD group exhibited significantly lower functional connectivity between the nucleus accumbens and a network of frontal cortical regions involved in cognitive control (dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and frontal operculum). There were no group differences in functional connectivity for the dorsal caudate or dorsal putamen.  Moreover, the SUD group exhibited impairments in laboratory measures of cognitive-behavioral control, and individual differences in functional connectivity between nucleus accumbens and the frontal cortical regions were related to individual differences in measures of cognitive-behavioral control across groups. The strength of the relationship between functional connectivity and cognitive control did not differ between groups. These results indicate that  SUD is associated with abnormal interactions between subcortical areas that process reward (nucleus accumbens) and cortical areas that govern cognitive-behavioral control. Hum Brain Mapp, 2014. (c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
24510765	18	n = 18
24512819	33	n = 33	Neurobiological models suggest that adolescents are driven by an overactive ventral striatum (VS) response to rewards that may lead to an adolescent increase in risk-taking behavior. However, empirical studies showed mixed findings of adolescents' brain response to rewards. In this study, we aimed to elucidate the  relationship between reward-related brain activation and risky decision-making. In addition, we examined effects of age, puberty, and individuals' reward sensitivity. We collected two datasets: Experiment 1 reports cross-sectional brain data from 75 participants (ages 10-25) who played a risky decision task. Experiment 2 presents a longitudinal extension in which a subset of these adolescents (n=33) was measured again 2years later. Results showed that (1) a reward-related network including VS and medial PFC was consistently activated over time, (2) the propensity to choose the risky option was related to increased reward-related activation in VS and medial PFC, and (3) longitudinal comparisons  indicated that self-reported reward sensitivity was specifically related to VS activation over time. Together, these results advance our insights in the brain circuitry underlying reward processing across adolescence.
24519980	93	n = 93	In the field of cognitive neuroscience, it is increasingly accepted that mentalizing is subserved by a complex frontotemporoparietal cortical network. Some researchers consider that this network can be divided into two distinct but  interacting subsystems (the mirror system and the mentalizing system per se), which respectively process low-level, perceptive-based aspects and high-level, inference-based aspects of this sociocognitive function. However, evidence for this type of functional dissociation in a given neuropsychological population is  currently lacking and the structural connectivities of the two mentalizing subnetworks have not been established. Here, we studied mentalizing in a large sample of patients (n = 93; 46 females; age range: 18-65 years) who had been resected for diffuse low-grade glioma-a rare tumour that migrates preferentially  along associative white matter pathways. This neurological disorder constitutes an ideal pathophysiological model in which to study the functional anatomy of associative pathways. We mapped the location of each patient's resection cavity and residual lesion infiltration onto the Montreal Neurological Institute template brain and then performed multilevel lesion analyses (including conventional voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping and subtraction lesion analyses). Importantly, we estimated each associative pathway's degree of disconnection (i.e. the degree of lesion infiltration) and built specific hypotheses concerning the connective anatomy of the mentalizing subnetworks. As expected, we found that impairments in mentalizing were mainly related to the disruption of right frontoparietal connectivity. More specifically, low-level and high-level mentalizing accuracy were correlated with the degree of disconnection in the arcuate fasciculus and the cingulum, respectively. To the best of our knowledge,  our findings constitute the first experimental data on the structural connectivity of the mentalizing network and suggest the existence of a dual-stream hodological system. Our results may lead to a better understanding of disorders that affect social cognition, especially in neuropathological conditions characterized by atypical/aberrant structural connectivity, such as autism spectrum disorders.
24523262	10	n = 10	Resting-state studies conducted with stroke patients are scarce. First objective  was to explore whether patients with good cognitive recovery showed differences in resting-state functional patterns of brain activity when compared to patients  with poor cognitive recovery. Second objective was to determine whether such patterns were correlated with cognitive performance. Third objective was to assess the existence of prognostic factors for cognitive recovery. Eighteen right-handed stroke patients and eighteen healthy controls were included in the study. Stroke patients were divided into two groups according to their cognitive  improvement observed at three months after stroke. Probabilistic independent component analysis was used to identify resting-state brain activity patterns. The analysis identified six networks: frontal, fronto-temporal, default mode network, secondary visual, parietal, and basal ganglia. Stroke patients showed significant decrease in brain activity in parietal and basal ganglia networks and a widespread increase in brain activity in the remaining ones when compared with  healthy controls. When analyzed separately, patients with poor cognitive recovery (n = 10) showed the same pattern as the whole stroke patient group, while patients with good cognitive recovery (n = 8) showed increased activity only in the default mode network and fronto-temporal network, and decreased activity in the basal ganglia. We observe negative correlations between basal ganglia network activity and performance in Semantic Fluency test and Part A of the Trail Making  Test for patients with poor cognitive recovery. A reverse pattern was observed between frontal network activity and the abovementioned tests for the same group. Hum Brain Mapp, 2014. (c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
24523262	8	n = 8
24523434	11	n = 11	Semantic dementia is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the amodal and profound loss of semantic knowledge attributable to the degeneration of the left anterior temporal lobe. Although traditionally conceptualized as a language disorder, patients with semantic dementia display significant alterations in behaviour and socioemotional functioning. Recent evidence points to an impaired capacity for theory of mind in predominantly left-lateralized cases of semantic dementia; however, it remains unclear to what  extent semantic impairments contribute to these deficits. Further the neuroanatomical signature of such disturbance remains unknown. Here, we sought to determine the neural correlates of theory of mind performance in patients with left predominant semantic dementia (n=11), in contrast with disease-matched cases with behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia (n=10) and Alzheimer's disease (n=10), and healthy older individuals (n=14) as control participants. Participants completed a simple cartoons task, in which they were required to describe physical and theory of mind scenarios. Irrespective of subscale, patients with semantic dementia exhibited marked impairments relative to control  subjects; however, only theory of mind deficits persisted when we covaried for semantic comprehension. Voxel-based morphometry analyses revealed that atrophy in right anterior temporal lobe structures, including the right temporal fusiform cortex, right inferior temporal gyrus, bilateral temporal poles and amygdalae, correlated significantly with theory of mind impairments in the semantic dementia group. Our results point to the marked disruption of cognitive functions beyond the language domain in semantic dementia, not exclusively attributable to semantic processing impairments. The significant involvement of right anterior temporal structures suggests that with disease evolution, the encroachment of pathology into the contralateral hemisphere heralds the onset of social cognitive deficits in this syndrome.
24523434	10	n = 10
24523434	10	n = 10
24523434	14	n = 14
24523939	14	n = 14	BACKGROUND: Amygdala hemodynamic responses to positive stimuli are attenuated in  major depressive disorder (MDD), and normalize with remission. Real-time functional MRI neurofeedback (rtfMRI-nf) offers a non-invasive method to modulate this regional activity. We examined whether depressed participants can use rtfMRI-nf to enhance amygdala responses to positive autobiographical memories, and whether this ability alters symptom severity. METHODS: Unmedicated MDD subjects were assigned to receive rtfMRI-nf from either left amygdala (LA; experimental group, n = 14) or the horizontal segment of the intraparietal sulcus (HIPS; control group, n = 7) and instructed to contemplate happy autobiographical memories (AMs) to raise the level of a bar representing the hemodynamic signal from the target region to a target level. This 40s Happy condition alternated with 40s blocks of rest and counting backwards. A final Transfer run without neurofeedback information was included. RESULTS: Participants in the experimental group upregulated their amygdala responses during positive AM recall. Significant pre-post scan decreases in anxiety ratings and increases in happiness ratings were evident in the experimental versus control group. A whole brain analysis showed that during the transfer run, participants in the experimental group had increased activity compared to the control group in left superior temporal gyrus  and temporal polar cortex, and right thalamus. CONCLUSIONS: Using rtfMRI-nf from  the left amygdala during recall of positive AMs, depressed subjects were able to  self-regulate their amygdala response, resulting in improved mood. Results from this proof-of-concept study suggest that rtfMRI-nf training with positive AM recall holds potential as a novel therapeutic approach in the treatment of depression.
24523939	7	n = 7
24529980	2	n = 2	Working memory, the capacity of actively maintaining task-relevant information during a cognitive task, is a heritable trait. Working memory deficits are characteristic for many psychiatric disorders. We performed genome-wide gene set  enrichment analyses in multiple independent data sets of young and aged cognitively healthy subjects (n = 2,824) and in a large schizophrenia case-control sample (n = 32,143). The voltage-gated cation channel activity gene  set, consisting of genes related to neuronal excitability, was robustly linked to performance in working memory-related tasks across ages and to schizophrenia. Functional brain imaging in 707 healthy participants linked this gene set also to working memory-related activity in the parietal cortex and the cerebellum. Gene set analyses may help to dissect the molecular underpinnings of cognitive dimensions, brain activity, and psychopathology.
24529980	32	n = 32
24561228	16	n = 16	The ability to perceive causality is a central human ability constructed from elemental spatial and temporal information present in the environment. Although the nature of causality has captivated philosophers and scientists since antiquity, the neural correlates of causality remain poorly understood. In the present study, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to generate hypotheses for candidate brain regions related to component processes important for perceptual causality in the human brain: elemental space perception, elemental time perception, and decision-making (Experiment 1; n=16). We then used transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to test neural hypotheses generated from the fMRI experiment (Experiment 2; n=16). In both experiments, participants judged causality in billiard-ball style launching events; a blue ball approaches and contacts a red ball. Spatial and temporal contributions to causal perception were assessed by parametrically varying the spatial linearity and the temporal delays of the movement of the balls. Experiment 1 demonstrated unique patterns of activation correlated with spatial, temporal, and decision-making components of causality perception. Using tDCS, we then tested hypotheses for the specific roles of the parietal and frontal cortices found in the fMRI experiment. Parietal stimulation only decreased participants' perception of causality based on spatial violations, while frontal stimulation made participants less likely to perceive causality based on violations of space and time. Converging results from fMRI and tDCS indicate that parietal cortices contribute to causal perception because of their specific role in processing spatial relations, while the frontal cortices contribute more generally, consistent with their role in decision-making.
24561228	16	n = 16
24568865	60	n = 60	Human memory is an enigmatic component of cognition which many researchers have attempted to comprehend. Accumulating studies on functional connectivity see brain as a complex dynamic unit with positively and negatively correlated networks in perfect coherence during a task. We aimed to examine coherence of network connectivity during visual memory encoding and retrieval in the context of education. School Educated (SE) and College Educated (CE) healthy volunteers (n=60) were recruited and assessed for visual encoding and retrieval. Functional  connectivity using seed to voxel based connectivity analysis of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) was evaluated. We noticed that there were reciprocal dynamic changes in both dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) region and PCC regions during working memory encoding and retrieval. In agreement with the previous studies, there were more positively correlated regions during retrieval  compared to encoding. The default mode network (DMN) networks showed greater negative correlations during more attentive task of visual encoding. In tune with the recent studies on cognitive reserve we also found that number of years of education was a significant factor influencing working memory connectivity. SE had higher positive correlation to DLPFC region and lower negative correlation to DMN in comparison with CE during encoding and retrieval.
24576686	16	n = 16	BACKGROUND: Previous research suggests that testosterone (T) plays a key role in  shaping competitive and aggressive behavior in humans, possibly by modulating threat-related neural circuitry. However, this research has been limited by the use of T augmentation that fails to account for baseline differences and has been conducted exclusively in women. Thus, the extent to which normal physiologic concentrations of T affect threat-related brain function in men remains unknown.  METHODS: In the current study, we use a novel two-step pharmacologic challenge protocol to overcome these limitations and to evaluate causal modulation of threat- and aggression-related neural circuits by T in healthy young men (n = 16). First, we controlled for baseline differences in T through administration of a gonadotropin releasing hormone antagonist. Once a common baseline was established across participants, we then administered T to within the normal physiologic range. During this second step of the protocol we acquired functional neuroimaging data to examine the impact of T augmentation on neural circuitry supporting threat and aggression. RESULTS: Gonadotropin releasing hormone antagonism successfully reduced circulating concentrations of T and brought subjects to a common baseline. Administration of T rapidly increased circulating  T concentrations and was associated with heightened reactivity of the amygdala, hypothalamus, and periaqueductal grey to angry facial expressions. CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide novel causal evidence that T rapidly potentiates the response of neural circuits mediating threat processing and aggressive behavior in men.
24581734	35	n = 35	Studies of adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have suggested that they have deficient response inhibition, but findings concerning the neural correlates of inhibition in this patient population are inconsistent.  We used the Stop-Signal task and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to  compare neural activation associated with response inhibition between adults with ADHD (N=35) and healthy comparison subjects (N=62), and in follow-up tests to examine the effect of current medication use and symptom severity. There were no  differences in Stop-Signal task performance or neural activation between ADHD and control participants. Among the ADHD participants, however, significant differences were associated with current medication, with individuals taking psychostimulants (N=25) showing less stopping-related activation than those not currently receiving psychostimulant medication (N=10). Follow-up analyses suggested that this difference in activation was independent of symptom severity. These results provide evidence that deficits in inhibition-related neural activation persist in a subset of adult ADHD individuals, namely those individuals currently taking psychostimulants. These findings help to explain some of the disparities in the literature, and advance our understanding of why deficits in response inhibition are more variable in adult, as compared with child and adolescent, ADHD patients.
24581734	62	n = 62
24581734	25	n = 25
24581734	10	n = 10
24583185	19	n = 19	We postulate that insulin regulation of food intake is compromised when insulin resistance is present. In order to investigate the effect of insulin sensitivity  on appetitive brain responses, we conducted functional magnetic resonance imaging studies in a group of women diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in which insulin sensitivity ranged from normal to resistant. Subjects (n=19) were imaged while viewing pictures of high calorie (HC) foods and low calorie (LC) foods after ingesting either 75 g glucose or an equivalent volume of water. The insulin sensitive group showed reduced blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal in response to food pictures following glucose ingestion in numerous corticolimbic brain regions, whereas the insulin resistant group did not. There was a significant interaction between insulin sensitivity (sensitive vs resistant) and condition (water vs glucose). The largest clusters identified included the left insula, bilateral limbic/parahippocampal gyrus/culmen/midbrain, bilateral limbic lobe/precuneus, and left superior/mid temporal gyrus/parietal for HC and LC stimuli combined, the left parahippocampal gyrus/fusiform/pulvinar/midbrain for HC pictures, and the left superior/mid temporal gyrus/parietal and middle/inferior frontal gyrus/orbitofrontal cortex for LC pictures. Furthermore, BOLD signal in the anterior cingulate, medial frontal gyrus, posterior cingulate/precuneus, and parietal cortex during a glucose challenge correlated negatively with insulin sensitivity. We conclude the PCOS women with insulin resistance have an impaired brain response to a glucose challenge. The inability of postprandial hyperinsulinemia to inhibit brain responsiveness to food cues in insulin resistant subjects may lead to greater non-homeostatic eating.
24642753	80	n = 80	Clinical investigations of many neuropsychiatric disorders rely on the assumption that diagnostic categories and typical control samples each have within-group homogeneity. However, research using human neuroimaging has revealed that much heterogeneity exists across individuals in both clinical and control samples. This reality necessitates that researchers identify and organize the potentially  varied patterns of brain physiology. We introduce an analytical approach for arriving at subgroups of individuals based entirely on their brain physiology. The method begins with Group Iterative Multiple Model Estimation (GIMME) to assess individual directed functional connectivity maps. GIMME is one of the only methods to date that can recover both the direction and presence of directed functional connectivity maps in heterogeneous data, making it an ideal place to start since it addresses the problem of heterogeneity. Individuals are then grouped based on similarities in their connectivity patterns using a modularity approach for community detection. Monte Carlo simulations demonstrate that using  GIMME in combination with the modularity algorithm works exceptionally well--on average over 97% of simulated individuals are placed in the accurate subgroup with no prior information on functional architecture or group identity. Having demonstrated reliability, we examine resting-state data of fronto-parietal regions drawn from a sample (N = 80) of typically developing and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) -diagnosed children. Here, we find 5 subgroups. Two subgroups were predominantly comprised of ADHD, suggesting  that more than one biological marker exists that can be used to identify children with ADHD based from their brain physiology. Empirical evidence presented here supports notions that heterogeneity exists in brain physiology within ADHD and control samples. This type of information gained from the approach presented here can assist in better characterizing patients in terms of outcomes, optimal treatment strategies, potential gene-environment interactions, and the use of biological phenomenon to assist with mental health.
24651705	11	n = 11	BACKGROUND: Individuals with anorexia nervosa (AN) are often cognitively rigid and behaviorally over-controlled. We previously showed that adult females recovered from AN relative to healthy comparison females had less prefrontal activation during an inhibition task, which suggested a functional brain correlate of altered inhibitory processing in individuals recovered from AN. However, the degree to which these functional brain alterations are related to disease state and whether error processing is altered in AN individuals is unknown. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the current study, ill adolescent AN  females (n = 11) and matched healthy comparison adolescents (CA) with no history  of an eating disorder (n = 12) performed a validated stop signal task (SST) during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to explore differences in error and inhibitory processing. The groups did not differ on sociodemographic variables or on SST performance. During inhibitory processing, a significant group x difficulty (hard, easy) interaction was detected in the right dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), right middle frontal gyrus (MFG), and left posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), which was characterized by less activation in AN compared to CA participants during hard trials. During error processing, a significant group x accuracy (successful inhibit, failed inhibit) interaction in  bilateral MFG and right PCC was observed, which was characterized by less activation in AN compared to CA participants during error (i.e., failed inhibit)  trials. CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Consistent with our prior findings in recovered  AN, ill AN adolescents, relative to CA, showed less inhibition-related activation within the dorsal ACC, MFG and PCC as inhibitory demand increased. In addition, ill AN adolescents, relative to CA, also showed reduced activation to errors in the bilateral MFG and left PCC. These findings suggest that altered prefrontal and cingulate activation during inhibitory and error processing may represent a behavioral characteristic in AN that is independent of the state of recovery.
24651705	12	n = 12
24662579	58	n = 58	Functional connections (FC) between the amygdala and cortical and subcortical regions underlie a range of affective and cognitive processes. Despite the central role amygdala networks have in these functions, the normative developmental emergence of FC between the amygdala and the rest of the brain is still largely undefined. This study employed amygdala subregion maps and resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging to characterize the typical development of human amygdala FC from age 4 to 23years old (n=58). Amygdala FC with subcortical and limbic regions was largely stable across this developmental  period. However, three cortical regions exhibited age-dependent changes in FC: amygdala FC with the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) increased with age, amygdala FC with a region including the insula and superior temporal sulcus decreased with age, and amygdala FC with a region encompassing the parahippocampal gyrus and posterior cingulate also decreased with age. The transition from childhood to adolescence (around age 10years) marked an important change-point in the nature of amygdala-cortical FC. We distinguished unique developmental patterns of coupling for three amygdala subregions and found particularly robust convergence  of FC for all subregions with the mPFC. These findings suggest that there are extensive changes in amygdala-cortical functional connectivity that emerge between childhood and adolescence.
24675026	24	n = 24	The complex symptoms of schizophrenia have recently been linked to disrupted neural circuits and corresponding malfunction of two higher-order intrinsic brain networks: The default mode network (DMN) and the fronto-parietal network (FPN). These networks are both functionally heterogeneous and consist of multiple subsystems. However, the extent to which these subsystems make differential contributions to disorder symptoms and to what degree such abnormalities occur in unaffected siblings have yet to be clarified. We used resting-state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) to examine group differences in intra- and inter-connectivity of subsystems within the two neural networks, across a sample of patients with schizophrenia (n=24), their unaffected siblings (n=25), and healthy controls (n=22). We used group independent component analysis (gICA) to identify four network subsystems, including anterior and posterior portions of the DMN (aDMN, pDMN) as well as left- and right-lateralized portions of the FPN (lFPN, rFPN). Intra-connectivity is defined as neural coherence within a subsystem whereas inter-connectivity refers to functional connectivity between subsystems. In terms of intra-connectivity, patients and siblings shared dysconnection within the aDMN and two FPN subsystems, while both groups preserved connectivity within the pDMN. In terms of inter-connectivity, all groups exhibited positive connections between FPN and DMN subsystems, with patients having even stronger interaction between rFPN and aDMN than the controls, a feature that may underlie their psychotic symptoms. Our results implicate that DMN subsystems exhibit different liabilities to the disease risk while FPN subsystems demonstrate distinct inter-connectivity  alterations. These dissociating manners between network subsystems explicitly suggest their differentiating roles to the disease susceptibility and manifestation.
24675026	25	n = 25
24675026	22	n = 22
24698429	20	n = 20	Posterior cortical volume changes and abnormal visuomotor performance are present in patients with Huntington's disease (HD). However, it is unclear whether posterior cortical volume loss contributes to abnormal neural activity, and whether activity changes predict cognitive dysfunction. Using magnetic resonance  imaging (MRI), we investigated brain structure and visual network activity at rest in patients with early HD (n = 20) and healthy controls (n = 20). The symbol digit modalities test (SDMT) and subtests of the Visual Object and Space Perception Battery were completed offline. For functional MRI data, a group independent component analysis was used. Voxel-based morphometry was employed to  assess regional brain atrophy, and 'biological parametric mapping' analyses were  included to investigate the impact of atrophy on neural activity. Patients showed significantly worse visuomotor and visual object performance than controls. Structural analyses confirmed occipitotemporal atrophy. In patients and controls, two spatiotemporally distinct visual systems were identified. Patients showed decreased activity in the left fusiform cortex, and increased left cerebellar activity. These findings remained stable after correction for brain atrophy. Lower fusiform cortex activity was associated with lower SDMT performance and with higher disease burden scores. These associations were absent when cerebellar function was related to task performance and disease burden. The results of this  study suggest that regionally specific functional abnormalities of the visual system can account for the worse visuomotor cognition in HD patients. However, occipital volume changes cannot sufficiently explain abnormal neural function in  these patients.
24698429	20	n = 20
24714661	12	n = 12	Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) was used to study the activation of  cerebral motor networks during auditory perception of music in professional keyboard musicians (n = 12). The activation paradigm implied that subjects listened to two-part polyphonic music, while either critically appraising the performance or imagining they were performing themselves. Two-part polyphonic audition and bimanual motor imagery circumvented a hemisphere bias associated with the convention of playing the melody with the right hand. Both tasks activated ventral premotor and auditory cortices, bilaterally, and the right anterior parietal cortex, when contrasted to 12 musically unskilled controls. Although left ventral premotor activation was increased during imagery (compared  to judgment), bilateral dorsal premotor and right posterior-superior parietal activations were quite unique to motor imagery. The latter suggests that musicians not only recruited their manual motor repertoire but also performed a spatial transformation from the vertically perceived pitch axis (high and low sound) to the horizontal axis of the keyboard. Imagery-specific activations in controls were seen in left dorsal parietal-premotor and supplementary motor cortices. Although these activations were less strong compared to musicians, this overlapping distribution indicated the recruitment of a general 'mirror-neuron' circuitry. These two levels of sensori-motor transformations point towards common principles by which the brain organizes audition-driven music performance and visually guided task performance.
24723873	21	n = 21	Monaural auditory input due to congenital or acquired unilateral hearing loss (UHL) may have neurobiological effects on the developing brain. Using functional  magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we investigated the effect of UHL on the development of functional brain networks used for cross-modal processing. Children ages 7-12 with moderate or greater unilateral hearing loss of sensorineural origin (UHL-SN; N = 21) and normal-hearing controls (N = 23) performed an fMRI-compatible adaptation of the Token Test involving listening to  a sentence such as "touched the small green circle and the large blue square" and simultaneously viewing an arrow touching colored shapes on a video. Children with right or severe-to-profound UHL-SN displayed smaller activation in a region encompassing the right inferior temporal, middle temporal, and middle occipital gyrus (BA 19/37/39), evidencing differences due to monaural hearing in cross-modal modulation of the visual processing pathway. Children with UHL-SN displayed increased activation in the left posterior superior temporal gyrus, likely the result either of more effortful low-level processing of auditory stimuli or differences in cross-modal modulation of the auditory processing pathway. Additionally, children with UHL-SN displayed reduced deactivation of anterior and posterior regions of the default mode network. Results suggest that  monaural hearing affects the development of brain networks related to cross-modal sensory processing and the regulation of the default network during processing of spoken language.
24723873	23	n = 23
24742620	43	n = 43	BACKGROUND: Difficulty with impulse control is heightened in children with a family history of alcohol use disorders and is a risk factor for later substance  problems. Cross-sectional functional magnetic resonance imaging studies have shown altered impulse control processing in adolescents with a positive family history, yet developmental trajectories have yet to be examined. METHODS: Longitudinal functional magnetic resonance imaging was conducted in children of alcoholic families (family history positive [FH+]; n = 43) and children of control families (family history negative [FH-]; n = 30) starting at ages 7-12 years. Participants performed a go/no-go task during functional magnetic resonance imaging at intervals of 1-2 years, with two to four scans performed per subject. We implemented a repeated-measures linear model fit across all subjects  to conduct a whole-brain search for developmental differences between groups. RESULTS: Performance improved with age in both groups, and there were no performance differences between groups. Significant between-group differences in  linear age-related activation changes were found in the right caudate, middle cingulate, and middle frontal gyrus. Post hoc analyses revealed significant activation decreases with age in the caudate and middle frontal gyrus for FH- subjects and a significant increase with age in middle cingulate activation for FH+ subjects. Group differences were evident at age 7-12 years, even in alcohol-  and drug-naive participants, with FH+ subjects showing significantly blunted activation at baseline compared with FH- subjects. CONCLUSIONS: Differences in response inhibition circuitry are visible in FH+ individuals during childhood; these differences continue into adolescence, displaying trajectories that are inconsistent with development of normal response inhibition. These patterns precede problem drinking and may be a contributing factor for subsequent substance use problems.
24742620	30	n = 30
24742863	16	n = 16	Flavor preferences vary; what one enjoys may be disgusting to another. Previous research has indicated several brain regions associated with flavor preferences.  However, by using different stimuli or different internal states to obtain differences in liking, results of these studies may be confounded. Therefore, we  used one target stimulus (grapefruit juice) and fMRI to compare brain activation  patterns between participants that either liked (n=16) or disliked (n=18) this stimulus. Our first aim was to investigate whether differential neural activation exists that accounts for the difference in subjective flavor preference for the target stimulus. Secondly, multivariate analysis was used to investigate whether  differences in subjective liking for the target revealed similar activation patterns as differences in general liking for a sweet and bitter solution. A direct comparison of likers and dislikers of the target stimulus revealed only small differences in activations in orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC). However, when using multivariate analysis, a broader activation pattern (including OFC, dACC, pregenual anterior cingulate, anterior insula and ventral striatum) was identified that discriminated likers from dislikers with an 88% success rate. Interestingly though, little overlap was found between this pattern and the pattern that discriminates liking for the sweet and bitter solutions and lesser voxels contributed to the former compared with the latter. These differences between patterns discerning innate versus learned preferences may suggest that different mechanisms are at work and highlight the importance of elucidating the neural processes of how subjective preferences are learned and acquired.
24742863	18	n = 18
24752071	320	n = 320	The core feature of separation anxiety is excessive distress when faced with actual or perceived separation from people to whom the individual has a strong emotional attachment. So far little is known about the neurobiological underpinnings of separation anxiety. Therefore, we investigated functional (amygdala responsiveness and functional connectivity during threat-related emotion processing) and structural (grey matter volume) imaging markers associated with separation anxiety as measured with the Relationship Scale Questionnaire in a large sample of healthy adults from the Munster Neuroimaging Cohort (N = 320). We used a robust emotional face-matching task and acquired high-resolution structural images for morphometric analyses using voxel-based morphometry. The main results were positive associations of separation anxiety scores with amygdala reactivity to emotional faces as well as increased amygdala  grey matter volumes. A functional connectivity analysis revealed positive associations between separation anxiety and functional coupling of the amygdala with areas involved in visual processes and attention, including several occipital and somatosensory areas. Taken together, the results suggest a higher emotional involvement in subjects with separation anxiety while watching negative facial expressions, and potentially secondary neuro-structural adaptive processes. These results could help to understand and treat (adult) separation anxiety.
24760032	18	n = 18	BACKGROUND: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common comorbidity of childhood epilepsy, but the neuroanatomical correlates of ADHD in  epilepsy have yet to be comprehensively characterized. METHODS: Children with new and recent-onset epilepsy with (n = 18) and without (n = 36) ADHD, and healthy controls (n = 46) underwent high resolution MRI. Measures of cortical morphology  (thickness, area, volume, curvature) and subcortical and cerebellar volumes were  compared between the groups using the program FreeSurfer 5.1. RESULTS: Compared to the control group, children with epilepsy and ADHD exhibited diffuse bilateral thinning in the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes, with volume reductions in the brainstem and subcortical structures (bilateral caudate, left thalamus, right hippocampus). There were very few group differences across measures of cortical volume, area or curvature. CONCLUSIONS: Children with epilepsy and comorbid ADHD  exhibited a pattern of bilateral and widespread decreased cortical thickness as well as decreased volume of subcortical structures and brainstem. These anatomic  abnormalities were evident early in the course of epilepsy suggesting the presence of antecedent neurodevelopmental changes, the course of which remains to be determined.
24760032	36	n = 36
24760032	46	n = 46
24760850	14	n = 14	Schizophrenia is characterized by dysfunctions in neural circuits that can be investigated with electrophysiological methods, such as EEG and MEG. In the present human study, we examined event-related fields (ERFs), in a sample of medication-naive, first-episode schizophrenia (FE-ScZ) patients (n = 14) and healthy control participants (n = 17) during perception of Mooney faces to investigate the integrity of neuromagnetic responses and their experience-dependent modification. ERF responses were analyzed for M100, M170, and M250 components at the sensor and source levels. In addition, we analyzed peak latency and adaptation effects due to stimulus repetition. FE-ScZ patients were characterized by significantly impaired sensory processing, as indicated by  a reduced discrimination index (A'). At the sensor level, M100 and M170 responses in FE-ScZ were within the normal range, whereas the M250 response was impaired. However, source localization revealed widespread elevated activity for M100 and M170 in FE-ScZ and delayed peak latencies for the M100 and M250 responses. In addition, M170 source activity in FE-ScZ was not modulated by stimulus repetitions. The present findings suggest that neural circuits in FE-ScZ may be characterized by a disturbed balance between excitation and inhibition that could lead to a failure to gate information flow and abnormal spreading of activity, which is compatible with dysfunctional glutamatergic neurotransmission.
24760850	17	n = 17
24795442	157	n = 157	Stressful life events increase vulnerability to problematic alcohol use, and they may do this by disrupting reward-related neural circuitry. This is particularly relevant for adolescents because alcohol use rises sharply after mid-adolescence  and alcohol abuse peaks at age 20. Adolescents also report more stressors compared with children, and neural reward circuitry may be especially vulnerable  to stressors during adolescence because of prefrontal cortex remodeling. Using a  large sample of male participants in a longitudinal functional magnetic resonance imaging study (N = 157), we evaluated whether cumulative stressful life events between the ages of 15 and 18 were associated with reward-related brain function  and problematic alcohol use at age 20 years. Higher cumulative stressful life events during adolescence were associated with decreased response in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) during monetary reward anticipation and following the receipt of monetary rewards. Stress-related decreases in mPFC response during reward anticipation and following rewarding outcomes were associated with the severity of alcohol dependence. Furthermore, mPFC response mediated the association between stressful life events and later symptoms of alcohol dependence. These data are consistent with neurobiological models of addiction that propose that stressors during adolescence increase risk for problematic alcohol use by disrupting reward circuit function.
24800897	17	n = 17	RATIONALE: Evidence from animal and human studies suggests that opiate drugs decrease emotional responses to negative stimuli and increase responses to positive stimuli. Such emotional effects may motivate misuse of oxycodone (OXY),  a widely abused opiate. Yet, we know little about how OXY affects neural circuits underlying emotional processing in humans. OBJECTIVE: We examined effects of OXY  on brain activity during presentation of positive and negative visual emotional stimuli. We predicted that OXY would decrease amygdala activity to negative stimuli and increase ventral striatum (VS) activity to positive stimuli. Secondarily, we examined the effects of OXY on other emotional network regions on an exploratory basis. METHODS: In a three-session study, healthy adults (N = 17)  received placebo, 10 and 20 mg OXY under counterbalanced, double-blind conditions. At each session, participants completed subjective and cardiovascular measures and underwent functional MRI (fMRI) scanning while completing two emotional response tasks. RESULTS: Our emotional tasks reliably activated emotional network areas. OXY produced subjective effects but did not alter either behavioral responses to emotional stimuli or activity in our primary areas of interest. OXY did decrease right medial orbitofrontal cortex (MOFC) responses to  happy faces. CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to our expectations, OXY did not affect behavioral or neural responses to emotional stimuli in our primary areas of interest. Further, the effects of OXY in the MOFC would be more consistent with a decrease in value for happy faces. This may indicate that healthy adults do not receive emotional benefits from opiates, or the pharmacological actions of OXY differ from other opiates.
24821182	12	n = 12	Life expectancy in multiple myeloma has significantly increased. However, a high  incidence of chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) can negatively influence quality of life during this period. This study applied functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare areas associated with central pain processing in patients with multiple myeloma who had chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy (MM-CIPN) with those from healthy volunteers (HV). Twenty-four participants (n = 12 MM-CIPN, n = 12 HV) underwent Blood Oxygen Level-Dependent (BOLD) fMRI at 3T whilst noxious heat-pain stimuli were applied to the foot and then thigh. Patients with MM-CIPN demonstrated greater activation during painful stimulation in the precuneus compared to HV (p = 0.014, FWE-corrected). Patients with MM-CIPN exhibited hypo-activation of the right superior frontal gyrus compared to HV (p = 0.031, FWE-corrected). Significant positive correlation existed between the total neuropathy score (reduced version) and activation in the frontal operculum (close to insular cortex) during foot stimulation in patients with MM-CIPN (p = 0.03, FWE-corrected; adjusted R2 = 0.87). Painful stimuli delivered to MM-CIPN patients evoke differential activation of distinct cortical regions, reflecting a unique pattern of central pain processing compared with healthy volunteers. This characteristic activation  pattern associated with pain furthers the understanding of the pathophysiology of painful chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy. Functional MRI provides a tool for monitoring cerebral changes during anti-cancer and analgesic treatment.
24821182	12	n = 12
24847113	155	n = 155	Early life experience differentially shapes later stress reactivity, as evidenced by both animal and human studies. However, early experience-related changes in the function of central visceral neural circuits that control stress responses have not been well characterized, particularly in humans. The paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN), bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), amygdala (Amyg) and subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (sgACC) form a core visceral stress-responsive circuit. The goal of this study is to examine how childhood emotional and physical abuse relates to adulthood stressor-evoked activity within these visceral brain regions. To evoke acute states of mental stress, participants (n = 155) performed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)-adapted versions of the multi-source interference task (MSIT) and the Stroop task with simultaneous monitoring of mean arterial pressure (MAP) and heart rate. Regression analyses revealed that childhood physical abuse correlated positively with stressor-evoked changes in MAP, and negatively with unbiased, a priori extractions of fMRI blood-oxygen level-dependent signal change values within the sgACC, BNST, PVN and Amyg (n = 138). Abuse-related changes in the function of visceral neural circuits may reflect neurobiological vulnerability to adverse health outcomes conferred by early adversity.
24847113	138	n = 138
24862560	94	n = 94	BACKGROUND: The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) and the 5-HTTLPR/rs25531 polymorphisms in its gene (SLC6A4) have been associated with depression, increased stress-response, and brain structural alterations such as reduced hippocampal volumes. Recently, epigenetic processes including SLC6A4 promoter methylation were shown to be affected by stress, trauma, or maltreatment and are  regarded to be involved in the etiology of affective disorders. However, neurobiological correlates of SLC6A4 promoter methylation have never been studied or compared to genotype effects by means of human neuroimaging hitherto METHODS:  Healthy subjects were recruited in two independent samples (N = 94, N = 95) to obtain structural gray matter images processed by voxel-based morphometry (VBM8), focusing on hippocampal, amygdala, and anterior cingulate gyrus gray matter structure. SLC6A4 promoter methylation within an AluJb element and 5-HTTLPR/rs25531 genotypes were analyzed in view of a possible impact on local gray matter volume RESULTS: Strong associations of AluJb methylation and hippocampal gray matter volumes emerged within each sample separately, which in the combined sample withstood most conservative alpha-corrections for the entire  brain. The amygdala, insula, and caudate nucleus showed similar associations. The 5-HTTLPR/rs25531 showed no main effect on gray matter, and the effect of methylation rates on hippocampal structure was comparable among the genotype groups CONCLUSIONS: Methylation within the AluJb appears to have strong effects on hippocampal gray matter volumes, indicating that epigenetic processes can alter brain structures crucially involved in stress-related disorders. Different  ways of regulating SLC6A4 expression might involve exonization or transcription factor binding as potentially underlying mechanisms, which, however, is speculative and warrants further investigation.
24862560	95	n = 95
24887402	13	n = 13	The increase in older adults over the coming decades will be accompanied by a greater burden of chronic neurological diseases affecting the motor system. The motor system adapts to maintain motor performance with the primary motor cortex (BA4) emerging as a pivotal node within this neuroplastic process. Studies of ageing often consider BA4 a homogenous area but cytoarchitectonic studies have revealed two subdivisions, an anterior (BA4a) and posterior subdivision (BA4p). Here we focus upon the effects of ageing on the involvement of BA4a and BA4p during movement and motor imagery (MI). Thirty-one right-handed healthy volunteers were recruited and screened for their ability to perform imagery (5 subjects excluded). The sample was split into an older group (n = 13, mean age 56.4 SD 9.4) and a younger group (n = 13, mean age 27.4 SD 5.3). We used an fMRI  block-design (auditory-paced [1 Hz] right hand finger-thumb opposition sequence [2,3,4,5, 2...]) with MI & rest and actual movement & rest. We explored the distribution-based clustering and weighted laterality index within BA4a and BA4p. The involvement of BA4p during MI (measured with distribution-based clustering) was significantly greater in the older group (p<0.05) than in the younger group.  Hemispheric balance of BA4p decreased with age during MI (Spearman rho -0.371; p<0.05), whereas that of BA4a decreased with age during actual movement (Spearman rho = -0.458 p<0.01). Irrespective of age, we found BA4 is involved during motor  imagery, strengthening the rationale for its potential use in older subjects. These findings suggest that the functions of the subdivisions of BA4 are differentially affected by ageing and have implications regarding how ageing affects the cognitive processes underlying motor functions.
24887402	13	n = 13
24899709	46	n = 46	Dietary habits such as caloric restriction or nutrients that mimic these effects  may exert beneficial effects on brain aging. The plant-derived polyphenol resveratrol has been shown to increase memory performance in primates; however, interventional studies in older humans are lacking. Here, we tested whether supplementation of resveratrol would enhance memory performance in older adults and addressed potential mechanisms underlying this effect. Twenty-three healthy overweight older individuals that successfully completed 26 weeks of resveratrol  intake (200 mg/d) were pairwise matched to 23 participants that received placebo  (total n = 46, 18 females, 50-75 years). Before and after the intervention/control period, subjects underwent memory tasks and neuroimaging to  assess volume, microstructure, and functional connectivity (FC) of the hippocampus, a key region implicated in memory functions. In addition, anthropometry, glucose and lipid metabolism, inflammation, neurotrophic factors,  and vascular parameters were assayed. We observed a significant effect of resveratrol on retention of words over 30 min compared with placebo (p = 0.038).  In addition, resveratrol led to significant increases in hippocampal FC, decreases in glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) and body fat, and increases in leptin compared with placebo (all p < 0.05). Increases in FC between the left posterior  hippocampus and the medial prefrontal cortex correlated with increases in retention scores and with decreases in HbA1c (all p < 0.05). This study provides  initial evidence that supplementary resveratrol improves memory performance in association with improved glucose metabolism and increased hippocampal FC in older adults. Our findings offer the basis for novel strategies to maintain brain health during aging.
24905072	13	n = 13	Chronic pain is one of the most prevalent health problems in the world today, yet neurological markers, critical to diagnosis of chronic pain, are still largely unknown. The ability to objectively identify individuals with chronic pain using  functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data is important for the advancement of diagnosis, treatment, and theoretical knowledge of brain processes associated with chronic pain. The purpose of our research is to investigate specific neurological markers that could be used to diagnose individuals experiencing chronic pain by using multivariate pattern analysis with fMRI data.  We hypothesize that individuals with chronic pain have different patterns of brain activity in response to induced pain. This pattern can be used to classify  the presence or absence of chronic pain. The fMRI experiment consisted of alternating 14 seconds of painful electric stimulation (applied to the lower back) with 14 seconds of rest. We analyzed contrast fMRI images in stimulation versus rest in pain-related brain regions to distinguish between the groups of participants: 1) chronic pain and 2) normal controls. We employed supervised machine learning techniques, specifically sparse logistic regression, to train a  classifier based on these contrast images using a leave-one-out cross-validation  procedure. We correctly classified 92.3% of the chronic pain group (N = 13) and 92.3% of the normal control group (N = 13) by recognizing multivariate patterns of activity in the somatosensory and inferior parietal cortex. This technique demonstrates that differences in the pattern of brain activity to induced pain can be used as a neurological marker to distinguish between individuals with and  without chronic pain. Medical, legal and business professionals have recognized the importance of this research topic and of developing objective measures of chronic pain. This method of data analysis was very successful in correctly classifying each of the two groups.
24905072	13	n = 13
24914005	23	n = 23	Chronic smoking may result in reduced sensitivity to non-drug rewards (e.g., money), a phenomenon particularly salient during abstinence. During a quit attempt, this effect may contribute to biased decision-making (smoking>alternative reinforcers) and relapse. Although relevant for quitting, characterization of reduced reward function in abstinent smokers remains limited. Moreover, how attenuated reward function affects other brain systems supporting decision-making has not been established. Here, we use a rewarded antisaccade (rAS) task to characterize non-drug reward processing and its influence on inhibitory control, key elements underlying decision-making, in abstinent smokers vs. non-smokers. Abstinent (12-hours) adult daily smokers (N=23) and non-smokers  (N=11) underwent fMRI while performing the rAS. Behavioral performances improved  on reward vs. neutral trials. Smokers showed attenuated activation in ventral striatum during the reward cue and in superior precentral sulcus and posterior parietal cortex during response preparation, but greater responses during the saccade response in posterior cingulate and parietal cortices. Smokers' attenuated anticipatory responses suggest reduced motivation from monetary reward, while heightened activation during the saccade response suggests that additional circuitry may be engaged later to enhance inhibitory task performance. Overall, this preliminary study highlights group differences in decision-making components and the utility of the rAS to characterize these effects.
24914005	11	n = 11
24927275	12	n = 12	OBJECTIVE: To study the influence of acupuncture at Waiguan (TE5) on the functional connectivity of the central nervous system of patients with ischemic stroke. METHODS: Twenty-four patients with ischemic stroke in the left basal ganglia were randomized based on gender to receive TE5 acupuncture (n = 12) or nonacupoint acupuncture (n = 12). Each group underwent sham acupuncture and then  verum acupuncture while being scanned with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Six regions of interest (ROI) were defined, including bilateral motor, somatosensory, and bilateral basal ganglia areas. The functional connectivity between these ROIs and all voxels of the brain was analyzed in Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI) to explore the differences between verum acupuncture and sham acupuncture at TE5 and between TE5 acupuncture and nonacupoint acupuncture. The participants were blinded to the allocation. RESULT: The effect of acupuncture on six seed-associated networks was explored. The result demonstrated that acupuncture at Waiguan (TE5) can regulate the sensorimotor network of the ipsilesional hemisphere, stimulate the contralesional sensorimotor network, increase cooperation of bilateral sensorimotor networks, and change the synchronization between the cerebellum and cerebrum. Furthermore,  a lot of differences of effect existed between verum acupuncture and sham acupuncture at TE5, but there was little difference between TE5 acupuncture and nonacupoint acupuncture. CONCLUSION: The modulation of synchronizations between different regions within different brain networks might be the mechanism of acupuncture at Waiguan (TE5). Stimulation of the contralesional sensorimotor network and increase of cooperation of bilateral hemispheres imply a compensatory effect of the intact hemisphere, whereas changes in synchronization might influence the sensorimotor function of the affected side of the body. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ChiCTR-ONRC-08000255.
24927275	12	n = 12
24936412	12	n = 12	Neuroimaging studies investigating the neural profile of anorexia nervosa (AN) have revealed a predominant imbalance between the reward and inhibition systems of the brain, which are also hallmark characteristics of the disorder. However, little is known whether these changes can also be determined independent of task  condition, using resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging, in currently ill AN patients. Therefore the aim of our study was to investigate resting-state connectivity in AN patients (n = 12) compared to healthy athlete (n = 12) and non-athlete (n = 14) controls. For this purpose, we used degree centrality to investigate functional connectivity of the whole-brain network and  then Granger causality to analyze effective connectivity (EC), to understand directional aspects of potential alterations. We were able to show that the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) is a region of special functional importance within the whole-brain network, in AN patients, revealing reduced functional connectivity compared to both healthy control groups. Furthermore, we  found decreased EC from the right IFG to the midcingulum and increased EC from the bilateral orbitofrontal gyrus to the right IFG. For the left IFG, we only observed increased EC from the bilateral insula to the left IFG. These results suggest that AN patients have reduced connectivity within the cognitive control system of the brain and increased connectivity within regions important for salience processing. Due to its fundamental role in inhibitory behavior, including motor response, altered integrity of the inferior frontal cortex could  contribute to hyperactivity in AN.
24936412	12	n = 12
24936412	14	n = 14
24936430	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: Violence that leads to homicide results in an extreme financial and emotional burden on society. Juveniles who commit homicide are often tried in adult court and typically spend the majority of their lives in prison. Despite the enormous costs associated with homicidal behavior, there have been no serious neuroscientific studies examining youth who commit homicide. METHODS: Here we use neuroimaging and voxel-based morphometry to examine brain gray matter in incarcerated male adolescents who committed homicide (n = 20) compared with incarcerated offenders who did not commit homicide (n = 135). Two additional control groups were used to understand further the nature of gray matter differences: incarcerated offenders who did not commit homicide matched on important demographic and psychometric variables (n = 20) and healthy participants from the community (n = 21). RESULTS: Compared with incarcerated adolescents who did not commit homicide (n = 135), incarcerated homicide offenders had reduced gray matter volumes in the medial and lateral temporal lobes, including the hippocampus and posterior insula. Feature selection and support vector machine learning classified offenders into the homicide and non-homicide groups with 81% overall accuracy. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate  that brain structural differences may help identify those at the highest risk for committing serious violent offenses.
24936430	135	n = 135
24936430	20	n = 20
24936430	21	n = 21
24936430	135	n = 135
24941136	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: Patients with schizophrenia often experience problems regulating their emotions. Non-affected relatives show similar difficulties, although to a lesser extent, and the neural basis of such difficulties remains to be elucidated. In the current paper we investigated whether schizophrenia patients,  non-affected siblings and healthy controls (HC) exhibit differences in brain activation during emotion regulation. METHODS: All subjects (n = 20 per group) performed an emotion regulation task while they were in an fMRI scanner. The task contained two experimental conditions for the down-regulation of emotions (reappraise and suppress), in which IAPS pictures were used to generate a negative affect. We also assessed whether the groups differed in emotion regulation strategies used in daily life by means of the emotion regulation questionnaire (ERQ). RESULTS: Though the overall negative affect was higher for patients as well as for siblings compared to HC for all conditions, all groups reported decreased negative affect after both regulation conditions. Nonetheless, neuroimaging results showed hypoactivation relative to HC in VLPFC, insula, middle temporal gyrus, caudate and thalamus for patients when reappraising negative pictures. In siblings, the same pattern was evident as in patients, but  only in cortical areas. CONCLUSIONS: Given that all groups performed similarly on the emotion regulation task, but differed in overall negative affect ratings and  brain activation, our findings suggest reduced levels of emotion regulation processing in neural circuits in patients with schizophrenia. Notably, this also  holds for siblings, albeit to a lesser extent, indicating that it may be part and parcel of a vulnerability for psychosis.
24979343	69	n = 69	Dopaminergic networks modulate neural processing across a spectrum of function from perception to learning to action. Multiple organizational schemes based on anatomy and function have been proposed for dopaminergic nuclei in the midbrain.  One schema originating in rodent models delineated ventral tegmental area (VTA),  implicated in complex behaviors like addiction, from more lateral substantia nigra (SN), preferentially implicated in movement. However, because anatomy and function in rodent midbrain differs from the primate midbrain in important ways,  the utility of this distinction for human neuroscience has been questioned. We asked whether functional definition of networks within the human dopaminergic midbrain would recapitulate this traditional anatomical topology. We first developed a method for reliably defining SN and VTA in humans at conventional MRI resolution. Hand-drawn VTA and SN regions-of-interest (ROIs) were constructed for 50 participants, using individually-localized anatomical landmarks and signal intensity. Individual segmentation was used in seed-based functional connectivity analysis of resting-state functional MRI data; results of this analysis recapitulated traditional anatomical targets of the VTA versus SN. Next, we constructed a probabilistic atlas of the VTA, SN, and the dopaminergic midbrain region (comprised of SN plus VTA) from individual hand-drawn ROIs. The combined probabilistic (SN plus VTA) ROI was then used for connectivity-based dual-regression analysis in two independent resting-state datasets (n = 69 and n  = 79). Results of the connectivity-based, dual-regression functional segmentation recapitulated results of the anatomical segmentation, validating the utility of this probabilistic atlas for future research.
24979343	79	n = 79
25064666	19	n = 19	Perception of time and temporal change is critical for human cognition. Yet, perception of temporal change is susceptible to contextual influences such as changes of a sound's pitch. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the current study aimed to investigate perception of temporal rate change and pitch-induced illusory distortions. In a 6 x 6 design, human participants (N=19)  listened to frequency-modulated sounds (~ 4 Hz) that varied over time in both modulation rate and pitch. Participants judged the direction of rate change ('speeding up' vs. 'slowing down'), while ignoring changes in pitch. Behaviorally, rate judgments were strongly biased by pitch changes: Participants  perceived rate to slow down when pitch decreased and to speed up when pitch increased ('rate-change illusion'). The fMRI data revealed activation increases with increasing task difficulty in pre-SMA, left putamen, and right IFG/insula. Importantly, activation in pre-SMA was linked to the perceptual sensitivity to discriminate rate changes and, together with the left putamen, to relative reductions in susceptibility to pitch-induced illusory distortions. Right IFG/insula activations, however, only scaled with task difficulty. These data offer a distinction between regions whose activations scale with perceptual sensitivity to features of time (pre-SMA) and those that more generally support behaving in difficult listening conditions (IFG/insula). Hence, the data underscore that individual differences in time perception can be related to different patterns of neurofunctional activation.
25078102	30	n = 30	Reward mediates the acquisition and long-term retention of procedural skills in humans. Yet, learning under rewarded conditions is highly variable across individuals and the mechanisms that determine interindividual variability in rewarded learning are not known. We postulated that baseline functional connectivity in a large-scale frontostriatal-limbic network could predict subsequent interindividual variability in rewarded learning. Resting-state functional MRI was acquired in two groups of subjects (n = 30) who then trained on a visuomotor procedural learning task with or without reward feedback. We then tested whether baseline functional connectivity within the frontostriatal-limbic  network predicted memory strength measured immediately, 24 h and 1 month after training in both groups. We found that connectivity in the frontostriatal-limbic  network predicted interindividual variability in the rewarded but not in the unrewarded learning group. Prediction was strongest for long-term memory. Similar links between connectivity and reward-based memory were absent in two control networks, a fronto-parieto-temporal language network and the dorsal attention network. The results indicate that baseline functional connectivity within the frontostriatal-limbic network successfully predicts long-term retention of rewarded learning. Hum Brain Mapp 35:5921-5931, 2014. (c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
25085883	20	n = 20	In young adults, canceling an initiated action depends on the right inferior frontal cortex (IFC), presupplementary motor area (preSMA), and the basal ganglia. Older adults show response inhibition deficits, but how this relates to  functional brain activation remains unclear. Using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging, we tested whether older adults (N = 20) exhibit overactivation during stop-signal inhibition as shown for attentional control tasks, or reduced activity compared with young adults (N = 20). We used a modified stop-signal task involving coupled bimanual responses and manipulated whether both or just one hand was cued to stop. Stop-task difficulty was matched  across groups. We found a group by condition interaction in supramarginal gyrus,  anterior insula, rIFC, and preSMA, with activation increasing for successful Stop versus Go trials in the young adults only. Comparing the groups on Stop trials revealed preSMA and striatum hypoactivity for older adults. White matter tracts connecting rIFC, preSMA, and the subthalamic nuclei were associated with stronger activation of preSMA in older adults, suggesting that maintenance of the brain's  structure has positive implications for brain function.
25085883	20	n = 20
25087073	15	n = 15	Recent advances in real-time functional magnetic resonance imaging (rt-fMRI) techniques enable online feedback about momentary brain activity from a localized region of interest. The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) as a central hub for cognitive and emotional networks and its modulation has been suggested to elicit  mood changes. In the presented real-time fMRI neurofeedback experiment at a 3 and a 7 T scanner we enabled participants to regulate ACC activity within one training session. The session consisted of three training runs of 8.5 min where subjects received online feedback about their current ACC activity. Before and after each run we presented emotional prosody. Subjects rated these stimuli according to their emotional valence and arousal, which served as an implicit mood measure. We found increases in ACC activation at 3 T (n = 15) and at 7 T (n  = 9) with a higher activation success for the 3 T group. FMRI signal control of the rostral ACC depended on signal quality and predicted a valence bias in the rating of emotional prosody. Real-time fMRI neurofeedback of the ACC is feasible  at different magnetic field strengths and can modulate localized ACC activity and emotion perception. It promises non-invasive therapeutic approaches for different psychiatric disorders characterized by impaired self-regulation.
25087073	9	n = 9
25107677	62	n = 62	BACKGROUND: The dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) has been implicated in psychiatric disorders in which deficits of self-regulation are a prominent feature (e.g., attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and substance use disorders) and in dopamine D4 receptor insensitivity within prefrontal regions of the brain. Our hypothesis was that carriers of 7-repeats in the Variable Number of Tandem Repeats (VNTR) of DRD4 (7R+) would recruit prefrontal brain regions involved in successful inhibitory control to a lesser degree than non-carriers (7R-) and demonstrate less inhibitory control as confirmed by observation of locally reduced blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) % signal change and lower accuracy while performing "No-Go" trials of a Go/No-Go task. METHODS: Participants (age=18, n=62, 33 females) were recruited from the general population of the St. Louis, Missouri region. Participants provided a blood or saliva sample for genotyping, completed drug and alcohol-related questionnaires and IQ testing, and performed a Go/No-Go task inside of a 3T fMRI scanner. RESULTS: Go/No-Go task performance did not significantly differ between 7R+ and 7R- groups. Contrast of brain activity during correct "No-Go" trials with a non-target letter baseline revealed significant BOLD activation in a network of brain regions previously implicated in inhibitory control including bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal, inferior frontal, middle frontal, medial prefrontal, subcortical, parietal/temporal, and occipital/cerebellar brain regions. Mean BOLD % signal change during "No-Go" trials was significantly modulated by DRD4 genotype, with 7R+ showing a lower hemodynamic response than 7R- in right anterior prefrontal cortex/inferior frontal gyrus, left premotor cortex, and right occipital/cerebellar areas. Follow-up analyses suggested that 7-repeat status accounted for approximately 5-6% of the variance in the BOLD response during "No-Go" trials. DISCUSSION: The DRD4 7-repeat allele may alter dopaminergic function in brain regions involved in inhibitory control. When individuals must inhibit a prepotent motor response, presence of this allele may  account for 5-6% of the variance in BOLD signal in brain regions critically associated with inhibitory control, but its influence may be associated with a greater effect on brain than on behavior in 18-year-olds from the general population.
25126055	149	n = 149	There is not only evidence for behavioral differences in voice perception between female and male listeners, but also recent suggestions for differences in neural  correlates between genders. The fMRI functional voice localizer (comprising a univariate analysis contrasting stimulation with vocal vs. non-vocal sounds) is known to give robust estimates of the temporal voice areas (TVAs). However, there is growing interest in employing multivariate analysis approaches to fMRI data (e.g., multivariate pattern analysis; MVPA). The aim of the current study was to  localize voice-related areas in both female and male listeners and to investigate whether brain maps may differ depending on the gender of the listener. After a univariate analysis, a random effects analysis was performed on female (n = 149)  and male (n = 123) listeners and contrasts between them were computed. In addition, MVPA with a whole-brain searchlight approach was implemented and classification maps were entered into a second-level permutation based random effects models using statistical non-parametric mapping (SnPM; Nichols and Holmes, 2002). Gender differences were found only in the MVPA. Identified regions were located in the middle part of the middle temporal gyrus (bilateral) and the  middle superior temporal gyrus (right hemisphere). Our results suggest differences in classifier performance between genders in response to the voice localizer with higher classification accuracy from local BOLD signal patterns in  several temporal-lobe regions in female listeners.
25126055	123	n = 123
25129889	23	n = 23	It has been proposed that cortical structural plasticity plays a crucial role in  the emergence and maintenance of chronic pain. Various distinct pain syndromes have accordingly been linked to specific patterns of decreases in regional gray matter volume (GMV). However, it is not known whether central poststroke pain (CPSP) is also associated with cortical structural plasticity. To determine this, we employed T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging at 3 T and voxel-based morphometry in 45 patients suffering from chronic subcortical sensory stroke with (n = 23) and without CPSP (n = 22), and healthy matched controls (n = 31). CPSP patients showed decreases in GMV in comparison to healthy controls, involving secondary somatosensory cortex (S2), anterior as well as posterior insular cortex, ventrolateral prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex, temporal cortex, and nucleus accumbens. Comparing CPSP patients to nonpain patients revealed a similar but more restricted pattern of atrophy comprising S2, ventrolateral prefrontal and temporal cortex. Additionally, GMV in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex negatively correlated to pain intensity ratings. This shows for the first time that CPSP is accompanied by a unique pattern of widespread structural plasticity, which involves the sensory-discriminative areas of insular/somatosensory cortex,  but also expands into prefrontal cortex and ventral striatum, where emotional aspects of pain are processed.
25129889	22	n = 22
25129889	31	n = 31
25131690	49	n = 49	The hypothalamus is of enormous importance for multiple bodily functions such as  energy homeostasis. Especially, rodent studies have greatly contributed to our understanding how specific hypothalamic subregions integrate peripheral and central signals into the brain to control food intake. In humans, however, the neural circuitry of the hypothalamus, with its different subregions, has not been delineated. Hence, the aim of this study was to map the hypothalamus network using resting-state functional connectivity (FC) analyses from the medial hypothalamus (MH) and lateral hypothalamus (LH) in healthy normal-weight adults (n = 49). Furthermore, in a separate sample, we examined differences within the LH and MH networks between healthy normal-weight (n = 25) versus overweight/obese adults (n = 23). FC patterns from the LH and MH revealed significant connections  to the striatum, thalamus, brainstem, orbitofrontal cortex, middle and posterior  cingulum and temporal brain regions. However, our analysis revealed subtler distinctions within hypothalamic subregions. The LH was functionally stronger connected to the dorsal striatum, anterior cingulum, and frontal operculum, while the MH showed stronger functional connections to the nucleus accumbens and medial orbitofrontal cortex. Furthermore, overweight/obese participants revealed heightened FC in the orbitofrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens within the MH network. Our results indicate that the MH and LH network are tapped into different parts of the dopaminergic circuitry of the brain, potentially modulating food reward based on the functional connections to the ventral and dorsal striatum, respectively. In obese adults, FC changes were observed in the MH network. Hum Brain Mapp 35:6088-6096, 2014. (c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
25131690	25	n = 25
25131690	23	n = 23
25132021	35	n = 35	Head motion (HM) is a critical confounding factor in functional MRI. Here we investigate whether HM during resting state functional MRI (RS-fMRI) is influenced by genetic factors in a sample of 462 twins (65% female; 101 MZ (monozygotic) and 130 DZ (dizygotic) twin pairs; mean age: 21 (SD=3.16), range 16-29). Heritability estimates for three HM components-mean translation (MT), maximum translation (MAXT) and mean rotation (MR)-ranged from 37 to 51%. We detected a significant common genetic influence on HM variability, with about two-thirds (genetic correlations range 0.76-1.00) of the variance shared between  MR, MT and MAXT. A composite metric (HM-PC1), which aggregated these three, was also moderately heritable (h2=42%). Using a sub-sample (N=35) of the twins we confirmed that mean and maximum translational and rotational motions were consistent "traits" over repeated scans (r=0.53-0.59); reliability was even higher for the composite metric (r=0.66). In addition, phenotypic and cross-trait cross-twin correlations between HM and resting state functional connectivities (RS-FCs) with Brodmann areas (BA) 44 and 45, in which RS-FCs were found to be moderately heritable (BA44: h2 =0.23 (sd=0.041), BA45: h2 =0.26 (sd=0.061)), indicated that HM might not represent a major bias in genetic studies using FCs.  Even so, the HM effect on FC was not completely eliminated after regression. HM may be a valuable endophenotype whose relationship with brain disorders remains to be elucidated.
25137414	31	n = 31	Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is an anxiety disorder that is associated with structural and functional alterations in several brain areas, including the  anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Here, we examine resting state functional connectivity of ACC subdivisions in PTSD, using a seed-based approach. Resting state magnetic resonance images were obtained from male veterans with (n = 31) and without (n = 25) PTSD, and healthy male civilian controls (n = 25). Veterans  with and without PTSD (combat controls) had reduced functional connectivity compared to healthy controls between the caudal ACC and the precentral gyrus, and between the perigenual ACC and the superior medial gyrus and middle temporal gyrus. Combat controls had increased connectivity between the rostral ACC and precentral/middle frontal gyrus compared to PTSD patients and healthy civilian controls. The resting state functional connectivity differences in the perigenual ACC network reported here indicate that veterans differ from healthy controls, potentially due to military training, deployment, and/or trauma exposure. In addition, specific alterations in the combat controls may potentially be related  to resilience. These results underline the importance of distinguishing trauma-exposed (combat) controls from healthy civilian controls when studying PTSD. Hum Brain Mapp, 2014. (c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
25137414	25	n = 25
25137414	25	n = 25
25143543	30	n = 30	Accurately making a decision in the face of incongruent options increases the efficiency of making similar congruency decisions in the future. Contextual factors like reward can modulate this adaptive process, suggesting that networks  associated with monitoring previous success and failure outcomes might contribute to this form of behavioral updating. To evaluate this possibility, a group of healthy adults (n = 30) were tested with functional MRI (fMRI) while they performed a color-word Stroop task. In a conflict-related region of the medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC), stronger BOLD responses predicted faster response times (RTs) on the next trial. More importantly, the degree of behavioral adaptation of RTs was correlated with the magnitude of mOFC-RT associations on the previous trial, but only after accounting for network-level interactions with prefrontal and striatal regions. This suggests that congruency sequencing effects may rely on interactions between distributed corticostriatal circuits. This possibility was evaluated by measuring the convergence of white matter projections from frontal areas into the striatum with diffusion-weighted imaging. In these pathways, greater convergence of corticostriatal projections correlated  with stronger functional mOFC-RT associations that, in turn, provided an indirect pathway linking anatomical structure to behavior. Thus distributed corticostriatal processing may mediate the orbitofrontal cortex's influence on behavioral updating, even in the absence of explicit rewards.
25171782	21	n = 21	BACKGROUND: The neural processes underlying the benefits of cognitive behavioral  treatment (CBT) for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) are not well understood. METHODS: Twenty-one (n=21) adults with a principal diagnosis of GAD and eleven (n=11) non-anxious healthy controls (HC) underwent functional magnetic resonance  imaging while completing a facial emotion processing task. Responses to threat-related emotionality (i.e., the contrast of fear and angry vs. happy faces) were assessed at pretreatment and again following 10 sessions of CBT in the GAD group and a comparable waiting period in the HC group. RESULTS: At pretreatment, GAD participants displayed blunted responses in the amygdala, insula, and anterior cingulate to the happy face-processing comparison condition, and greater amygdalo-insular connectivity. CBT was associated with attenuated amygdalar and subgenual anterior cingulate activation to fear/angry faces and heightened insular responses to the happy face comparison condition, but had no apparent effects on connectivity. Pre-treatment abnormalities and treatment-related changes were not associated with symptoms of worry. LIMITATIONS: There was no active control condition (e.g., treatment waitlist) for comparison of treatment effects. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results provide evidence for a dual-process psychotherapeutic model of neural systems changes in GAD in which cingulo-amygdalar reactivity to threat-cues is attenuated while insular responses to positive facial emotions are potentiated. Future work  is needed to determine the clinical implications of these changes and their specificity to CBT.
25171782	11	n = 11
25197013	12	n = 12	Patients with schizophrenia as well as individuals with high levels of schizotypy are known to have deficits in smooth pursuit eye movements (SPEM). Here, we investigated, for the first time, the neural mechanisms underlying SPEM performance in high schizotypy. Thirty-one healthy participants [N = 19 low schizotypes, N = 12 high schizotypes (HS)] underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging at 3T with concurrent oculographic recording while performing a SPEM task with sinusoidal stimuli at two velocities (0.2 and 0.4 Hz). Behaviorally, a significant interaction between schizotypy group and velocity was found for frequency of saccades during SPEM, indicating impairments in HS in the  slow but not the fast condition. On the neural level, HS demonstrated lower brain activation in different regions of the occipital lobe known to be associated with early sensory and attentional processing and motion perception (V3A, middle occipital gyrus, and fusiform gyrus). This group difference in neural activation  was independent of target velocity. Together, these findings replicate the observation of altered pursuit performance in highly schizotypal individuals and, for the first time, identify brain activation patterns accompanying these performance changes. These posterior activation differences are compatible with evidence of motion processing deficits from the schizophrenia literature and, therefore, suggest overlap between schizotypy and schizophrenia both on cognitive-perceptual and neurophysiological levels. However, deficits in frontal  motor areas observed during pursuit in schizophrenia were not seen here, suggesting the operation of additional genetic and/or illness-related influences  in the clinical disorder. Hum Brain Mapp, 2014. (c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
25208743	206	n = 206	Converging behavioral evidence indicates that temporal discounting, measured by intertemporal choice tasks, is inversely related to intelligence. At the neural level, the parieto-frontal network is pivotal for complex, higher-order cognitive processes. Relatedly, underrecruitment of the pFC during a working memory task has been found to be associated with steeper temporal discounting. Furthermore, this network has also been shown to be related to the consistency of intertemporal choices. Here we report an fMRI study that directly investigated the association of neural correlates of intertemporal choice behavior with intelligence in an adolescent sample (n = 206; age 13.7-15.5 years). After identifying brain regions where the BOLD response during intertemporal choice was correlated with individual differences in intelligence, we further tested whether BOLD responses in these areas would mediate the associations between intelligence, the discounting rate, and choice consistency. We found positive correlations between BOLD response in a value-independent decision network (i.e., dorsolateral pFC, precuneus, and occipital areas) and intelligence. Furthermore,  BOLD response in a value-dependent decision network (i.e., perigenual ACC, inferior frontal gyrus, ventromedial pFC, ventral striatum) was positively correlated with intelligence. The mediation analysis revealed that BOLD responses in the value-independent network mediated the association between intelligence and choice consistency, whereas BOLD responses in the value-dependent network mediated the association between intelligence and the discounting rate. In summary, our findings provide evidence for common neural correlates of intertemporal choice and intelligence, possibly linked by valuation as well as executive functions.
25246508	16	n = 16	The posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is an anatomically heterogeneous brain region implicated in a wide range of cognitive operations, including egocentric spatial  processing and both short- and long-term memory. Here, we report functional specificities of cytoarchitectonically defined subregions of PPC during the processing of scenes across changes in viewpoint. Participants (n = 16) saw photographs of familiar and unfamiliar places while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). On each trial, 4 viewpoints of the same place  were presented, with either a plausible sequence of viewpoints (SEQ) or a scrambled order (SCRA). Distinct response profiles were observed within PPC. Area 7A showed increased activity for SEQ versus SCRA order, regardless of place familiarity, whereas the rostral inferior parietal lobule showed preferential increases for unfamiliar versus familiar places in SEQ series. In contrast, more  posterior subregions in both superior and inferior PPC exhibited increases for familiar versus unfamiliar places at the end of the sequence, regardless of order. The data highlight the distinctive contribution of several subregions of PPC during the processing of scenes, with specific cortical areas involved in the progressive integration of spatial information across viewpoint changes, and others involved in the retrieval and maintenance of scene information in memory.
25264230	96	n = 96	Evidence from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies shows that healthy aging is associated with profound changes in cortical and subcortical brain structures. The reliable delineation of cortex and basal ganglia using automated computational anatomy methods based on T1-weighted images remains challenging, which results in controversies in the literature. In this study we use quantitative MRI (qMRI) to gain an insight into the microstructural mechanisms underlying tissue ageing and look for potential interactions between ageing and brain tissue properties to assess their impact on automated tissue classification. To this end we acquired maps of longitudinal relaxation rate R1,  effective transverse relaxation rate R2* and magnetization transfer - MT, from healthy subjects (n=96, aged 21-88years) using a well-established multi-parameter mapping qMRI protocol. Within the framework of voxel-based quantification we find higher grey matter volume in basal ganglia, cerebellar dentate and prefrontal cortex when tissue classification is based on MT maps compared with T1 maps. These discrepancies between grey matter volume estimates can be attributed to R2* - a surrogate marker of iron concentration, and further modulation by an interaction between R2* and age, both in cortical and subcortical areas. We interpret our findings as direct evidence for the impact of ageing-related brain  tissue property changes on automated tissue classification of brain structures using SPM12. Computational anatomy studies of ageing and neurodegeneration should acknowledge these effects, particularly when inferring about underlying pathophysiology from regional cortex and basal ganglia volume changes.
25264353	136	n = 136	The present fMRI experiment employed associative recognition to investigate the relationships between age and encoding-related negative subsequent memory effects and task-negative effects. Young, middle-aged and older adults (total n=136) were scanned while they made relational judgments on visually presented word pairs. In a later memory test, the participants made associative recognition judgments on studied, rearranged (items studied on different trials) and new pairs. Several regions, mostly localized to the default mode network, demonstrated negative subsequent memory effects in an across age-group analysis. All but one of these regions also demonstrated task-negative effects, although there was no correlation between the size of the respective effects. Whereas negative subsequent memory effects demonstrated a graded attenuation with age, task-negative effects declined markedly between the young and the middle-aged group, but showed no further reduction in the older group. Negative subsequent memory effects did not correlate with memory performance within any age group. By contrast, in the older group only, task-negative effects predicted later memory performance. The findings demonstrate that negative subsequent memory and task-negative effects depend on dissociable neural mechanisms and likely reflect  distinct cognitive processes. The relationship between task-negative effects and  memory performance in the older group might reflect the sensitivity of these effects to variations in amount of age-related neuropathology. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled SI: Memory.
25266592	27	n = 27	Although previous studies demonstrated decreased functional connectivity in the default mode network in the cognitively normal older adults with amyloid burden,  effects of amyloid burden in the other large-scale intrinsic connectivity networks are not yet clear. The aim of this study was to investigate the distinctive association pattern of amyloid-beta deposition on the three large-scale intrinsic connectivity networks (the default mode network, salience network and central executive network) in older adults with normal cognition. Fifty-six older adults with normal cognition underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging and were dichotomized using (11)C-labelled Pittsburgh compound  B positron emission tomography imaging into subjects with (PiB+; n = 27) and without (PiB-; n = 29) detectable amyloid burden. We found that the functional connectivities of (i) the default mode network were greater; (ii) the salience network were not different; and (iii) the central executive network were lower in the Pittsburgh compound B positive group, compared with the Pittsburgh compound B negative group. Anterior cingulate cortex Pittsburgh compound B retention was negatively correlated with the functional connectivities of the posterior default mode network, and positively correlated with fronto-parietal functional connectivity (within the central executive network) in the Pittsburgh compound B  positive group. The anti-correlation strength between the default mode network and the central executive network was negatively correlated with the anterior cingulate cortex Pittsburgh compound B levels. Additionally, significant group x  episodic memory interactions with functional connectivities in the posterior default mode network, and the frontal default mode network were observed. Our results of aberrant default mode network functional connectivity and distinctive  correlation patterns between the Pittsburgh compound B retention in the anterior  cingulate cortex and functional connectivities in the default mode network and central executive network in the Pittsburgh compound B positive group might reflect a detrimental effect of amyloid retention on functional changes in the course of Alzheimer's disease progression.
25266592	29	n = 29
25272033	26	n = 26	PURPOSE: To investigate correlations between altered spontaneous brain activity,  diabetic vascular disease, and cognitive function for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) using resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI). METHODS: Rs-fMRI was performed for T2DM patients (n = 26) and  age-, gender-, and education-matched non-diabetic control subjects (n = 26). Amplitude of low frequency fluctuations (ALFF) were computed from fMRI signals to measure spontaneous neuronal activity. Differences in the ALFF patterns between patients and controls, as well as their correlations with clinical variables, were evaluated. RESULTS: Compared with healthy controls, T2DM patients exhibited  significantly decreased ALFF values mainly in the frontal and parietal lobes, the bilateral thalumi, the posterior lobe of the cerebellum, and increased ALFF values mainly in the visual cortices. Furthermore, lower ALFF values in the left  subcallosal gyrus correlated with lower ankle-brachial index values (r = 0.481, p = 0.020), while lower ALFF values in the bilateral medial prefrontal gyri correlated with higher urinary albumin-creatinine ratio (r = -0.418, p = 0.047).  In addition, most of the regions with increased ALFF values in the visual cortices were found to negatively correlate with MoCA scores. CONCLUSIONS: These  results confirm that ALFF are altered in many brain regions in T2DM patients, and this is associated with the presence of diabetic vascular disease and poor cognitive performance. These findings may provide additional insight into the neurophysiological mechanisms that mediate T2DM-related cognitive dysfunction, and may also serve as a reference for future research.
25272033	26	n = 26
25274576	16	n = 16	Attentional control difficulties likely underlie rumination, a core cognitive vulnerability in major depressive disorder (MDD). Abnormalities in the default mode, executive and salience networks are implicated in both rumination and attentional control difficulties in MDD. In the current study, individuals with MDD (n = 16) and healthy controls (n = 16) completed tasks designed to elicit self-focused (ruminative) and externally-focused thinking during fMRI scanning. The MDD group showed greater default mode network connectivity and less executive and salience network connectivity during the external-focus condition. Contrary to our predictions, there were no differences in connectivity between the groups  during the self-focus condition. Thus, it appears that when directed to engage in self-referential thinking, both depressed and non-depressed individuals similarly recruit networks supporting this process. In contrast, when instructed to engage  in non-self-focused thought, non-depressed individuals show a pattern of network  connectivity indicative of minimized self-referential processing, whereas depressed individuals fail to reallocate neural resources in a manner consistent  with effective down regulation of self-focused thought. This is consistent with difficulties in regulating self-focused thinking in order to engage in more goal-directed behavior that is seen in individuals with MDD.
25274576	16	n = 16
25281280	21	n = 21	Heavy prenatal alcohol exposure results in a range of deficits, including both volumetric and functional changes in brain regions involved in response inhibition such as the prefrontal cortex and striatum. The current study examined blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) response during a stop signal task in adolescents (ages 13-16y) with histories of heavy prenatal alcohol exposure (AE,  n=21) and controls (CON, n=21). Task performance was measured using percent correct inhibits during three difficulty conditions: easy, medium, and hard. Group differences in BOLD response relative to baseline motor responding were examined across all inhibition trials and for each difficulty condition separately. The contrast between hard and easy trials was analyzed to determine whether increasing task difficulty affected BOLD response. Groups had similar task performance and demographic characteristics, except for full scale IQ scores (AE<CON). The AE group demonstrated greater BOLD response in frontal, sensorimotor, striatal, and cingulate regions relative to controls, especially as task difficulty increased. When contrasting hard vs. easy inhibition trials, the  AE group showed greater medial/superior frontal and cuneus BOLD response than controls. Results were unchanged after demographics and FAS diagnosis were statistically controlled. This was the first fMRI study to utilize a stop signal  task, isolating fronto-striatal functioning, to assess response inhibition and the effects task difficulty in adolescents with prenatal alcohol exposure. Results suggest that heavy prenatal alcohol exposure disrupts neural function of  this circuitry, resulting in immature cognitive processing and motor-association  learning and neural compensation during response inhibition.
25281280	21	n = 21
25288478	72	n = 72	Anhedonia is an enduring trait accounting for the reduced capacity to experience  pleasure. Few studies have investigated the brain structural features associated  with trait anhedonia. In this study, the relationships between cortical thickness, volume of subcortical structures and scores on the Chapman physical and social anhedonia scales were examined in a non-clinical sample (n=72, 35 males). FreeSurfer was used to examine the cortical thickness and the volume of six identified subcortical structures related to trait anhedonia. We found that the cortical thickness of the superior frontal gyrus and the volume of the pallidum in the left hemisphere were correlated with anhedonia scores in both physical and social aspects. Specifically, positive correlations were found between levels of social anhedonia and the thickness of the postcentral and the inferior parietal gyri. Cortico-subcortical inter-correlations between these clusters were also observed. Our findings revealed distinct correlation patterns  of neural substrates with trait physical and social anhedonia in a non-clinical sample. These findings contribute to the understanding of the pathologies underlying the anhedonia phenotype in schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders.
25305568	14	n = 14	Not all memory processes are equally affected by aging. A widely accepted hypothesis is that older adults rely more on familiarity-based processing, typically linked with the perirhinal cortex (PRC), in the context of impaired recollection, linked with the hippocampus (HC). However, according to the dedifferentiation hypothesis, healthy aging reduces the specialization of MTL memory subregions so that they may mediate different memory processes than in young adults. Using fMRI, we tested this possibility using a conceptual fluency manipulation known to induce familiarity-related PRC activity. The study yielded  two main findings. First, although fluency equivalently affected PRC in both young (18-28; N=14) and older (62-80; N=15) adults, it also uniquely affected HC  activity in older adults. Second, the fluency manipulation reduced functional connectivity between HC and PRC in young adults, but it increased it in older adults. Taken together, the results suggest that aging may result in reduced specialization of the HC for recollection, such that the HC may be recruited when fluency increases familiarity-based responding. Age-related differences in medial temporal lobe involvement during conceptual fluency.
25305568	15	n = 15
25307723	40	n = 40	Introduction: The cortical midline structures seem to be involved in the modulation of different resting state networks, such as the default mode network  (DMN) and salience network (SN). Alterations in these systems, in particular in the perigenual anterior cingulate cortex (PACC), seem to play a central role in bipolar disorder (BD). However, the exact role of the PACC, and its functional connections to other midline regions (within and outside DMN) still remains unclear in BD. Methods: We investigated functional connectivity (FC), standard deviation (SD, as a measure of neuronal variability) and their correlation in bipolar patients (n = 40) versus healthy controls (n = 40), in the PACC and in its connections in different frequency bands (standard: 0.01-0.10 Hz; Slow-5: 0.01-0.027 Hz; Slow-4: 0.027-0.073 Hz). Finally, we studied the correlations between FC alterations and clinical-neuropsychological parameters and we explored whether subgroups of patients in different phases of the illness present different patterns of FC abnormalities. Results: We found in BD decreased FC (especially in Slow-5) from the PACC to other regions located predominantly in the posterior DMN (such as the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and inferior temporal gyrus) and in the SN (such as the supragenual anterior cingulate cortex  and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex). Second, we found in BD a decoupling between PACC-based FC and variability in the various target regions (without alteration in variability itself). Finally, in our subgroups explorative analysis, we found  a decrease in FC between the PACC and supragenual ACC (in depressive phase) and between the PACC and PCC (in manic phase). Conclusions: These findings suggest that in BD the communication, that is, information transfer, between the different cortical midline regions within the cingulate gyrus does not seem to work properly. This may result in dysbalance between different resting state networks like the DMN and SN. A deficit in the anterior DMN-SN connectivity could lead to an abnormal shifting toward the DMN, while a deficit in the anterior DMN-posterior DMN connectivity could lead to an abnormal shifting toward the SN,  resulting in excessive focusing on internal contents and reduced transition from  idea to action or in excessive focusing on external contents and increased transition from idea to action, respectively, which could represent central dimensions of depression and mania. If confirmed, they could represent diagnostic markers in BD. Hum Brain Mapp, 2014. (c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
25307723	40	n = 40
25338633	17	n = 17	Although recent research has begun to describe the neural and genetic processes underlying variability in responses to trauma, less is known about how these processes interact. We addressed this issue by using functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine the relationship between posttraumatic stress symptomatology (PTSS), a common genetic polymorphism of the serotonin transporter [5-HTT (5-hydroxy tryptamine)] gene and neural activity in response to viewing images associated with the 9/11 terrorist attack among a rare sample of high-exposure 9/11 survivors (n = 17). Participants varied in whether they carried a copy of the short allele in the promoter region of the 5-HTT gene. During scanning, participants viewed images of the 9/11 attack, non-9/11 negative and neutral images. Three key findings are reported. First, carriers of the short allele displayed higher levels of PTSS. Second, both PTSS and the presence of the short allele correlated negatively with activity in a network of cortical midline regions (e.g. the retrosplenal and more posterior cingulate cortices (PCCs)) implicated in episodic memories and self-reflection when viewing 9/11 vs non-9/11 negative control images. Finally, exploratory analyses indicated that PCC activity mediated the relationship between genotype and PTSS. These results highlight the role of PCC in distress following trauma.
25379437	80	n = 80	The neurobiological underpinnings of effort-related monetary reward processing of gambling disorder have not been previously studied. To date neuroimaging studies  lack in large sample sizes and as a consequence less attention has been given to  brain reward processing that could potentially be attributed to comorbid conditions such as depressive mood state. We assessed monetary reward processing  using an effort-dependent task during 3 tesla functional magnetic resonance imaging. We investigated a large sample of male, right-handed, slot-machine-playing disordered gamblers (DGs; N = 80) as well as age- and smoking-matched male healthy controls (HCs; N = 89). Depressive symptoms were assessed using the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). DGs and HCs were divided into subgroups ("high" and "low") based on their BDI scores. Effort-related monetary reward processing did not differ between the complete groups of HCs and DGs. Brain activation during receipt of monetary reward though revealed a significant  Group x BDI interaction: DGs with higher BDI scores compared to DGs with lower BDI scores showed greater brain activity in the right insula cortex and dorsal striatum while no differences were observed for HCs with higher versus lower BDI  scores. Our results suggest that effort-related aspects of monetary motivation, i.e. when monetary output is tied to performance, are not altered in DG. Additionally, our findings strengthen the need for subgroup comparisons in future investigations of the disorder as part of a personalized medicine approach.
25379437	89	n = 89
25381653	20	n = 20	Associative memory is essential to everyday activities, such as the binding of faces and corresponding names to form single bits of information. However, this ability often becomes impaired with increasing age. The most important neural substrate of associative memory is the hippocampus, a structure crucially implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The main aim of this  study was to compare neural correlates of associative memory in healthy aging and mild cognitive impairment (MCI), an at-risk state for AD. We used fMRI to investigate differences in brain activation and connectivity between young controls (n = 20), elderly controls (n = 32) and MCI patients (n = 21) during associative memory retrieval. We observed lower hippocampal activation in MCI patients than control groups during a face-name recognition task, and the magnitude of this decrement was correlated with lower associative memory performance. Further, increased activation in precentral regions in all older adults indicated a stronger involvement of the task positive network (TPN) with age. Finally, functional connectivity analysis revealed a stronger link of hippocampal and striatal components in older adults in comparison to young controls, regardless of memory impairment. In elderly controls, this went hand-in-hand with a stronger activation of striatal areas. Increased TPN activation may be linked to greater reliance on cognitive control in both older groups, while increased functional connectivity between the hippocampus and the striatum may suggest dedifferentiation, especially in elderly controls.
25381653	32	n = 32
25381653	21	n = 21
25433424	42	n = 42	The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) adopts a dimensional approach for examining pathophysiological processes underlying categorically defined psychiatric diagnoses. We used this framework to examine relationships among symptom dimensions, diagnostic categories, and resting state connectivity in behaviorally and emotionally dysregulated youth selected from the Longitudinal Assessment of Manic Symptoms study (n=42) and healthy control youth (n=18). Region of interest  analyses examined relationships among resting state connectivity, symptom dimensions (behavioral and emotional dysregulation measured with the Parent General Behavior Inventory-10 Item Mania Scale [PGBI-10M]; dimensional severity measures of mania, depression, anxiety), and diagnostic categories (Bipolar Spectrum Disorders, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Anxiety Disorders,  and Disruptive Behavior Disorders). After adjusting for demographic variables, two dimensional measures showed significant inverse relationships with resting state connectivity, regardless of diagnosis: 1) PGBI-10M with amygdala-left posterior insula/bilateral putamen; and 2) depressive symptoms with amygdala-right posterior insula connectivity. Diagnostic categories showed no significant relationships with resting state connectivity. Resting state connectivity between amygdala and posterior insula decreased with increasing severity of behavioral and emotional dysregulation and depression; this suggests  an intrinsic functional uncoupling of key neural regions supporting emotion processing and regulation. These findings support the RDoC dimensional approach for characterizing pathophysiologic processes that cut across different psychiatric disorders.
25433424	18	n = 18
25438043	10	n = 10	Individuals who were born very preterm (VPT; <33 gestational weeks) are at risk of experiencing deficits in tasks involving executive function in childhood and beyond. In addition, the type and severity of neonatal brain injury associated with very preterm birth may exert differential effects on executive functioning by altering its neuroanatomical substrates. Here we addressed this question by investigating with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) the haemodynamic  response during executive-type processing using a phonological verbal fluency and a working memory task in VPT-born young adults who had experienced differing degrees of neonatal brain injury. 12 VPT individuals with a history of periventricular haemorrhage and ventricular dilatation (PVH+VD), 17 VPT individuals with a history of uncomplicated periventricular haemorrhage (UPVH), 13 VPT individuals with no history of neonatal brain injury and 17 controls received an MRI scan whilst completing a verbal fluency task with two cognitive loads ('easy' and 'hard' letters). Two groups of VPT individuals (PVH+VD; n = 10, UPVH; n = 8) performed an n-back task with three cognitive loads (1-, 2-, 3-back). Results demonstrated that VPT individuals displayed hyperactivation in frontal, temporal, and parietal cortices and in caudate nucleus, insula and thalamus compared to controls, as demands of the verbal fluency task increased, regardless of type of neonatal brain injury. On the other hand, during the n-back task and as working memory load increased, the PVH+VD group showed less engagement of the frontal cortex than the UPVH group. In conclusion, this study suggests that the functional neuroanatomy of different executive-type processes is altered following VPT birth and that neural activation associated with specific aspects of executive function (i.e., working memory) may be particularly sensitive to the extent of neonatal brain injury.
25438043	8	n = 8
25442118	235	n = 235	Occipital sources of resting-state electroencephalographic (EEG) alpha rhythms are abnormal, at the group level, in patients with amnesic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, we evaluated the hypothesis  that amplitude of these occipital sources is related to neurodegeneration in occipital lobe as measured by magnetic resonance imaging. Resting-state eyes-closed EEG rhythms were recorded in 45 healthy elderly (Nold), 100 MCI, and  90 AD subjects. Neurodegeneration of occipital lobe was indexed by weighted averages of gray matter density, estimated from structural MRIs. EEG rhythms of interest were alpha 1 (8-10.5 Hz) and alpha 2 (10.5-13 Hz). EEG cortical sources  were estimated by low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography. Results showed a positive correlation between occipital gray matter density and amplitude of occipital alpha 1 sources in Nold, MCI, and AD subjects as a whole group (r = 0.3, p = 0.000004, N = 235). Furthermore, there was a positive correlation between the amplitude of occipital alpha 1 sources and cognitive status as revealed by Mini Mental State Examination score across all subjects (r = 0.38, p  = 0.000001, N = 235). Finally, amplitude of occipital alpha 1 sources allowed a moderate classification of individual Nold and AD subjects (sensitivity: 87.8%; specificity: 66.7%; area under the receiver operating characteristic curve: 0.81). These results suggest that the amplitude of occipital sources of resting-state alpha rhythms is related to AD neurodegeneration in occipital lobe  along pathologic aging.
25442118	235	n = 235
25444164	19	n = 19	BACKGROUND: This study investigated the dynamics of cognitive control instability in methamphetamine (MA) abuse, as well its relationship to substance-induced psychiatric symptoms and drug use patterns. METHODS: We used an ex-Gaussian reaction time (RT) distribution to examine intraindividual variability (IIV) and  excessively long RTs (tau) in an individual's RT on a Stroop task in 30 currently drug-abstinent (3 months to 2 years) MA abusers compared with 27 nonsubstance-abusing control subjects. All subjects underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while performing the Stroop task, which allowed us to measure the relationship between IIV and tau to functional brain activity. RESULTS: Elevated IIV in the MA compared with the control group did not reach significance; however, when the MA group was divided into those subjects who had  experienced MA-induced psychosis (MAP+) (n = 19) and those who had not (n = 11),  the MAP+ group had higher average IIV compared with the other groups (p < .03). In addition, although control subjects displayed a relationship between IIV and conflict-related brain activity in bilateral prefrontal cortex such that increased IIV was associated with increased activity, the MAP+ group displayed this relationship in right prefrontal cortex only, perhaps reflecting elevated vigilance in the MAP+ group. Greater IIV did not correlate with severity of use or months MA abstinent. No group differences emerged in tau values. CONCLUSIONS:  These results suggest increased cognitive instability in those MA-dependent subjects who had experienced MA-induced psychosis.
25444164	11	n = 11
25451423	20	n = 20	The pervasive and persistent nature of depressive symptoms has made resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) an appropriate approach for understanding the underlying mechanisms of major depressive disorder. The majority of rs-fMRI research has focused on depression-related alterations in the interregional coordination of brain baseline low frequency oscillations (LFOs). However, alteration of the regional amplitude of LFOs in depression, particularly its clinical, cognitive and network implications, has not been examined comprehensively yet. rs-fMRI amplitudes of low-frequency fluctuation (ALFF/fALFF) mediated by two LFO bands of 0.01-0.08Hz (LF-ALFF/fALFF) and 0.1-0.25Hz (HF-ALFF/fALFF) were measured in unmedicated subjects with major depressive disorder (n=20) and a healthy control group (n=25). A novel method of "ALFF-based functional connectivity" analysis was developed to test regional/network interaction abnormalities in depression. Our results revealed abnormal alterations in ALFF for both lower and higher frequency bands of LFOs in regions  that participate in affective networks, corticostriatal circuits and motor/somatosensory networks. A strong positive correlation was detected between  depressive symptom severity and fALFF in the anterior cingulate cortex. Functional connectivity of the thalamus and postcentral area with altered ALFF were found to be decreased with other interacting regions of their involved networks. Major depressive disorder relates to the alterations of regional properties of intrinsic neural activity with meaningful clinical and cognitive correlations. This study also proposes an integrating regional/network dysfunction in MDD.
25451423	25	n = 25
25451479	5	n = 5	Thalamic deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an FDA-approved neurosurgical treatment  for medication-refractory essential tremor. Its therapeutic benefit is highly dependent upon stimulation frequency and voltage parameters. We investigated these stimulation parameter-dependent effects on neural network activation by performing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during DBS of the ventral lateral (VL) thalamus and comparing the blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD)  signals induced by multiple stimulation parameter combinations in a within-subject study of swine. Low (10 Hz) and high (130 Hz) frequency stimulation was applied at 3, 5, and 7 V in the VL thalamus of normal swine (n =  5). We found that stimulation frequency and voltage combinations differentially modulated the brain network activity in the sensorimotor cortex, the basal ganglia, and the cerebellum in a parameter-dependent manner. Notably, in the motor cortex, high frequency stimulation generated a negative BOLD response, while low frequency stimulation increased the positive BOLD response. These frequency-dependent differential effects suggest that the VL thalamus is an exemplary target for investigating functional network connectivity associated with therapeutic DBS.
25452569	30	n = 30	Sex hormones, androgens in particular, are hypothesized to play a key role in the sexual differentiation of the human brain. However, possible direct effects of the sex chromosomes, that is, XX or XY, have not been well studied in humans. Individuals with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), who have a 46,XY karyotype but a female phenotype due to a complete androgen resistance, enable us to study the separate effects of gonadal hormones versus sex chromosomes on neural sex differences. Therefore, in the present study, we compared 46,XY men (n = 30) and 46,XX women (n = 29) to 46,XY individuals with CAIS (n = 21) on a mental rotation task using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Previously reported sex differences in neural activation during mental rotation were replicated in the control groups, with control men showing more activation in the inferior parietal lobe than control women. Individuals with CAIS showed a female-like neural activation pattern in the parietal lobe, indicating feminization of the brain in CAIS. Furthermore, this first neuroimaging study in individuals with CAIS provides evidence that sex differences in regional brain function during mental rotation are most likely not directly driven by genetic sex, but rather reflect gonadal hormone exposure.
25452569	29	n = 29
25452569	21	n = 21
25453166	22	n = 22	The adaptive trade-off between exploration and exploitation is a key component in models of reinforcement learning. Over the past decade, these models have been applied to the study of reward-seeking behavior. Drugs of addiction induce reward-seeking behavior and modify its underlying neurophysiological processes. These neurophysiological changes may underlie a behavioral shift from a flexible, exploratory mode to a focused, exploitative mode, which precedes the development  of inflexible, habitual drug use. The goal of this study was to investigate the relationship between explore/exploit behavior and drug addiction by examining the neural correlates of this behavior in cigarette smokers. Participants (n=22) with a range of smoking behaviors completed a smoking dependence motives questionnaire and played a 6-armed bandit task while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Exploratory behavior produced greater activation in the bilateral superior parietal and bilateral frontal cortices than exploitative behavior. Exploitative behavior produced greater activation in the bilateral superior and middle temporal gyri than exploratory behavior. fMRI data and orthogonalized smoking dependence motive scores were entered into multiple linear regression analyses. After controlling for nicotine tolerance, smoking automaticity positively correlated with activation in the same bilateral parietal regions preferentially activated by exploratory choices. These preliminary results link smoking dependence motives to variation in the neural processes that mediate exploratory decision making.
25458571	20	n = 20	BACKGROUND: Impaired insight into illness (clinical insight) in schizophrenia has negative effects on treatment adherence and clinical outcomes. Schizophrenia is described as a disorder of disrupted brain connectivity. In line with this concept, resting state networks (RSNs) appear differentially affected in persons  with schizophrenia. Therefore, impaired clinical, or the related construct of cognitive insight (which posits that impaired clinical insight is a function of metacognitive deficits), may reflect alterations in RSN functional connectivity (fc). Based on our previous research, which showed that impaired insight into illness was associated with increased left hemisphere volume relative to right, we hypothesized that impaired clinical insight would be associated with increased connectivity in the DMN with specific left hemisphere brain regions. METHODS: Resting state MRI scans were acquired for participants with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder (n=20). Seed-to-voxel and ROI-to-ROI fc analyses were performed using the CONN-fMRI fc toolbox v13 for established RSNs. Clinical and cognitive insight were measured with the Schedule for the Assessment of Insight-Expanded Version and Beck Cognitive Insight Scale, respectively, and included as the regressors in fc analyses. RESULTS: As hypothesized, impaired clinical insight was associated with increased connectivity in the default mode network (DMN) with the left angular gyrus, and also in the self-referential network (SRN) with the left insula. Cognitive insight was associated with increased connectivity in the dorsal attention network (DAN) with the right inferior frontal cortex (IFC) and left anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). CONCLUSION: Increased connectivity in DMN and SRN with the left angular gyrus and insula, respectively, may represent neural correlates of impaired clinical insight in schizophrenia spectrum disorders, and is consistent with the literature attributing impaired insight to left hemisphere dominance. Increased connectivity in the DAN with the IFC and ACC in relation to cognitive insight may facilitate enhanced mental flexibility in this sample.
25461267	7	n = 7	The mechanisms underlying conditioned pain modulation (CPM) are multifaceted. We  searched for a link between individual differences in prefrontal cortex activity  during multi-trial heterotopic noxious cold conditioning and modulation of the cerebral response to phasic heat pain. In 24 healthy female subjects, we conditioned laser heat stimuli to the left hand by applying alternatively ice-cold or lukewarm compresses to the right foot. We compared pain ratings with  cerebral fMRI BOLD responses. We also analyzed the relation between CPM and BOLD  changes produced by the heterotopic cold conditioning itself, as well as the impact of anxiety and habituation of cold-pain ratings. Specific cerebral activation was identified in precuneus and left posterior insula/SII, respectively, during early and sustained phases of cold application. During cold  conditioning, laser pain decreased (n=7), increased (n=10) or stayed unchanged (n=7). At the individual level, the psychophysical effect was directly proportional to the cold-induced modulation of the laser-induced BOLD response in left posterior insula/SII. The latter correlated with the BOLD response recorded  80s earlier during the initial 10-s phase of cold application in anterior cingulate, orbitofrontal and lateral prefrontal cortices. High anxiety and habituation of cold pain were associated with greater laser heat-induced pain during heterotopic cold stimulation. The habituation was also linked to the early cold-induced orbitofrontal responses. We conclude that individual differences in  conditioned pain modulation are related to different levels of prefrontal cortical activation by the early part of the conditioning stimulus, possibly due  to different levels in trait anxiety.
25461267	10	n = 10
25461267	7	n = 7
25467302	70	n = 70	By exploiting information that is contained in the spatial arrangement of neural  activations, multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) can detect distributed brain activations which are not accessible by standard univariate analysis. Recent methodological advances in MVPA regularization techniques have made it feasible to produce sparse discriminative whole-brain maps with highly specific patterns.  Furthermore, the most recent refinement, the Graph Net, explicitly takes the 3D-structure of fMRI data into account. Here, these advanced classification methods were applied to a large fMRI sample (N=70) in order to gain novel insights into the functional localization of outcome integration processes. While the beneficial effect of differential outcomes is well-studied in trial-and-error learning, outcome integration in the context of instruction-based learning has remained largely unexplored. In order to examine neural processes associated with outcome integration in the context of instruction-based learning, two groups of subjects underwent functional imaging while being presented with either differential or ambiguous outcomes following the execution of varying stimulus-response instructions. While no significant univariate group differences were found in the resulting fMRI dataset, L1-regularized (sparse) classifiers performed significantly above chance and also clearly outperformed the standard L2-regularized (dense) Support Vector Machine on this whole-brain between-subject classification task. Moreover, additional L2-regularization via the Elastic Net and spatial regularization by the Graph Net improved interpretability of discriminative weight maps but were accompanied by reduced classification accuracies. Most importantly, classification based on sparse regularization facilitated the identification of highly specific regions differentially engaged  under ambiguous and differential outcome conditions, comprising several prefrontal regions previously associated with probabilistic learning, rule integration and reward processing. Additionally, a detailed post-hoc analysis of  these regions revealed that distinct activation dynamics underlay the processing  of ambiguous relative to differential outcomes. Together, these results show that L1-regularization can improve classification performance while simultaneously providing highly specific and interpretable discriminative activation patterns.
25496980	19	n = 19	Many young adults who attempt suicide have no discernible mental illness, suggesting an etiology distinct from other psychiatric disorders. Neurological anomalies associated with a history of suicidal behavior may predict future risk. In the present study, we explored changes in neural circuit organization associated with suicidal behavior by comparing local synchronization of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging signals in suicide attempters without a psychiatric diagnosis (SA group, 19.84+/-1.61 years, n=19) with those in healthy controls (HC group, 20.30+/-1.72 years, n=20) using regional homogeneity (ReHo) analysis. The SA group exhibited significantly lower mean ReHo in the left (L) fusiform and supraorbital inferior frontal gyri, L hippocampus, bilateral parahippocampal and middle frontal gyri, right (R) angular gyrus, and cerebellar lobules RVIII, RII, and LVI compared with the HC group. Conversely, in the SA group, ReHo was higher in the R supraorbital middle frontal gyrus, R inferior parietal lobe, and L precuneus. The SA group also had significantly higher total Barratt Impulsiveness Scale scores compared with the HC group. Local functional connectivity is altered in multiple regions of the cerebral cortex, limbic system, and cerebellum of suicidal young adults. Elucidating the functional deficits associated with these ReHo changes may clarify the pathophysiological mechanisms of suicidal behavior and assist in identifying high-risk individuals.
25496980	20	n = 20
25497221	47	n = 47	Patients with schizophrenia often suffer from apathy: a quantitative reduction of voluntary, goal-directed behaviors that impairs daily functioning. We hypothesized that schizophrenia patients with high levels of apathy would show decreased activation in brain regions involved in planning and goal-directed behavior. Patients with schizophrenia or psychotic spectrum disorder (n=47) and healthy controls (n=20) performed the Tower of London (ToL) task during fMRI scanning using arterial spin labeling. To investigate the relationship between apathy and planning in patients, a proxy measure of apathy based on the Positive  and Negative syndrome Scale was regressed against the task-related brain activation. Brain activation was also compared between patients and healthy controls. Higher levels of apathy were associated with less task-related activation within the inferior parietal lobule precuneus and thalamus. Compared to controls, patients showed lower activation in lateral prefrontal regions, parietal and motor areas, and a higher activation of medial frontal areas. Apathy was related to abnormal activation in thalamus and parietal regions during the ToL task. This supports the hypothesis that impaired function of brain regions involved in planning and goal-directed behavior may underlie apathy in schizophrenia. Moreover, impaired lateral prefrontal activation in schizophrenia  patients compared to controls is consistent with the hypofrontality model of schizophrenia. In contrast, stronger medial frontal activation in patients may be related to increased effort to perform a task with conflicting task solutions.
25497221	20	n = 20
25498391	33	n = 33	Although pronounced and lasting deficits in selective attention have been observed for preterm born individuals it is unknown which specific attentional sub-mechanisms are affected and how they relate to brain networks. We used the computationally specified 'Theory of Visual Attention' together with whole- and partial-report paradigms to compare attentional sub-mechanisms of pre- (n=33) and full-term (n=32) born adults. Resting-state fMRI was used to evaluate both between-group differences and inter-individual variance in changed functional connectivity of intrinsic brain networks relevant for visual attention. In preterm born adults, we found specific impairments of visual short-term memory (vSTM) storage capacity while other sub-mechanisms such as processing speed or attentional weighting were unchanged. Furthermore, changed functional connectivity was found in unimodal visual and supramodal attention-related intrinsic networks. Among preterm born adults, the individual pattern of changed  connectivity in occipital and parietal cortices was systematically associated with vSTM in such a way that the more distinct the connectivity differences, the  better the preterm adults' storage capacity. These findings provide first evidence for selectively changed attentional sub-mechanisms in preterm born adults and their relation to altered intrinsic brain networks. In particular, data suggest that cortical changes in intrinsic functional connectivity may compensate adverse developmental consequences of prematurity on visual short-term storage capacity.
25498391	32	n = 32
25524755	60	n = 60	BACKGROUND: The psychological profile of patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD), with impulsivity and emotional dysregulation as core symptoms, has guided the search for abnormalities in specific brain areas such as the hippocampal-amygdala complex and the frontomedial cortex. However, whole-brain imaging studies so far have delivered highly heterogeneous results involving different brain locations. METHODS: Functional resting-state and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging data were acquired in patients with BPD and in an equal number of matched control subjects (n = 60 for resting and n = 43 for diffusion). While mean diffusivity and fractional anisotropy brain images were generated from diffusion data, amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations and global brain connectivity images were used for the first time to evaluate BPD-related brain abnormalities from resting functional acquisitions. RESULTS: Whole-brain analyses using a p = .05 corrected threshold showed a convergence of alterations  in BPD patients in genual and perigenual structures, with frontal white matter fractional anisotropy abnormalities partially encircling areas of increased mean  diffusivity and global brain connectivity. Additionally, a cluster of enlarged amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations (high resting activity) was found involving part of the left hippocampus and amygdala. In turn, this cluster showed increased resting functional connectivity with the anterior cingulate. CONCLUSIONS: With a multimodal approach and without using a priori selected regions, we prove that structural and functional abnormality in BPD involves both temporolimbic and frontomedial structures as well as their connectivity. These structures have been previously related to behavioral and clinical symptoms in patients with BPD.
25524755	43	n = 43
25528288	16	n = 16	Neurocognitive processing of orthographic visuospatial complexity was examined through fMRI-based overt naming (n=16) of phonologically transparent, high and low frequency Hindi/Devanagari words that were visually simple (, ) or complex (, ). Participants' overt behavior was modestly influenced by visuospatial complexity (accuracy: main effect p=.01, complexityxfrequency interaction p<.07), while neuroimaging data revealed a robust effect of complexity (main effect FWE p<10(-4), complexityxfrequency interaction FWE p<7x10(-8)). Interaction-based RoIs showed higher BOLD response in the VWFA to complex and left posterior temporal cortex to simple words, with greater right lingual de-activation to complex than simple words. Subtractions confirmed additional recruitment of VWFA, right frontal, inferior orbitofrontal, mid-temporal pole and left cerebellum by visuospatially complex over simple words. Finally, low frequency words activated  bilateral occipital and putamen areas, left IPL, SPL, IFG and VWFA, suggesting that effortful phonological processing in alphasyllabic Hindi/Devanagari requires neural resources specialized for both visuospatially simple and complex orthographies.
25550068	10	n = 10	The interpersonal model of loss of control (LOC) eating proposes that socially distressing situations lead to anxious states that trigger excessive food consumption. Self-reports support these links, but the neurobiological underpinnings of these relationships remain unclear. We therefore examined brain  regions associated with anxiety in relation to LOC eating and energy intake in the laboratory. Twenty-two overweight and obese (BMIz: 1.9+/-0.4) adolescent (15.8+/-1.6y) girls with LOC eating (LOC+, n=10) and without LOC eating (LOC-, n=12) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during a simulated peer interaction chatroom paradigm. Immediately after the fMRI scan, girls consumed lunch ad libitum from a 10,934-kcal laboratory buffet meal with the instruction to "let yourself go and eat as much as you want." Pre-specified hypotheses regarding activation of five regions of interest were tested. Analysis of fMRI data revealed a significant group by peer feedback interaction in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), such that LOC+ had less activity following peer rejection (vs. acceptance), while LOC- had increased activity (p<.005). Moreover, functional coupling between vmPFC and striatum for peer rejection (vs. acceptance) interacted with LOC status: coupling was positive for  LOC+, but negative in LOC- (p<.005). Activity of fusiform face area (FFA) during  negative peer feedback from high-value peers also interacted with LOC status (p<.005). A positive association between FFA activation and intake during the meal was observed among only those with LOC eating. In conclusion, overweight and obese girls with LOC eating may be distinguished by a failure to engage regions of prefrontal cortex implicated in emotion regulation in response to social distress. The relationship between FFA activation and food intake supports the notion that heightened sensitivity to incoming interpersonal cues and perturbations in socio-emotional neural circuits may lead to overeating in order  to cope with negative affect elicited by social discomfort in susceptible youth.
25550068	12	n = 12
25613405	14	n = 14	Previous research in patients with cerebellar damage suggests that the cerebellum plays a role in covert visual attention. One limitation of some of these studies  is that they examined patients with heterogeneous cerebellar damage. As a result, the patterns of reported deficits have been inconsistent. In the current study, we used functional neuroimaging (fMRI) in healthy adults (N=14) to examine whether or not the cerebellum plays a role in covert visual attention. Participants performed two covert attention tasks in which they were cued exogenously (with peripheral flashes) or endogenously (using directional arrows)  to attend to marked locations in the visual periphery without moving their eyes.  We compared BOLD activation in these covert attention conditions to a number of control conditions including: the same attention tasks with eye movements, a target detection task with no cueing, and a self-paced button-press task. Subtracting these control conditions from the covert attention conditions allowed us to effectively remove the contribution of the cerebellum to motor output. In addition to the usual fronto-parietal networks commonly engaged by these attention tasks, lobule VI of the vermis in the cerebellum was also activated when participants performed the covert attention tasks with or without eye movements. Interestingly, this effect was larger for exogenous compared to endogenous cueing. These results, in concert with recent patient studies, provide independent yet converging evidence that the same cerebellar structures that are  involved in eye movements are also involved in visuospatial attention.
25717289	320	n = 320	Previous studies have used task-related fMRI to investigate the neural basis of pitch identification (PI), but no study has examined the associations between resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) and PI ability. Using a large sample of Chinese non-musicians (N = 320, with 56 having prior musical training), the current study examined the associations among musical training, PI ability, and RSFC. Results showed that musical training was associated with increased RSFC within the networks for multiple cognitive functions (such as vision, phonology,  semantics, auditory encoding, and executive functions). PI ability was associated with RSFC with regions for perceptual and auditory encoding for participants with musical training, and with RSFC with regions for short-term memory, semantics, and phonology for participants without musical training.
25725510	18	n = 18	In spite of considerable progress in the understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying the experience of empathy, the majority of previous investigations have focused on how we share negative affective states (and in particular pain) of others, whereas only few studies have targeted empathy for positive emotions.  This bias has precluded addressing one of the central tenets of the shared representations account of empathy, which is that different networks should be engaged when empathizing with emotions that are represented on different neural levels. The aim of the present study was to overcome this limitation and to test  whether empathy for pleasant and unpleasant affective touch is underpinned by different neural networks. To this end we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), with two independent replication experiments (N = 18, N = 32), and a novel paradigm enabling the joint investigation of first-hand and vicarious responses to pleasant and unpleasant affect induced via visuo-tactile stimulation. This revealed that empathy is subserved by distinct neural networks, with those regions recruited in the first-hand experience of positive or negative affective states also being specifically recruited when empathizing with these respective states in others. More specifically, the first-hand and vicarious experience of pleasant touch commonly recruited medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), while unpleasant touch was associated with shared activation in the right  fronto-insular cortex. The observation that specifically tailored subsystems of the human brain are engaged to share positive versus negative touch of others brings fresh evidence to one of the major goals of the social neuroscience of empathy: to identify which specific aspects of the affective states of others are shared, and what role this plays in enabling the understanding of the emotions of others.
25725510	32	n = 32
25731999	308	n = 308	Several studies using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans have shown developmental trajectories of cortical thickness. Cognitive milestones happen concurrently with these structural changes, and a delay in such changes has been  implicated in developmental disorders such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Accurate estimation of individuals' brain maturity, therefore, is critical in establishing a baseline for normal brain development against which neurodevelopmental disorders can be assessed. In this study, cortical thickness derived from structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of a large longitudinal dataset of normally growing children and adolescents (n=308), were used to build a highly accurate predictive model for estimating chronological age (cross-validated correlation up to R=0.84). Unlike previous studies which used kernelized approach in building prediction models, we used an elastic net penalized linear regression model capable of producing a spatially sparse, yet accurate predictive model of chronological age. Upon investigating different scales of cortical parcellation from 78 to 10,240 brain parcels, we observed that the accuracy in estimated age improved with increased spatial scale of brain parcellation, with the best estimations obtained for spatial resolutions consisting of 2560 and 10,240 brain parcels. The top predictors of brain maturity were found in highly localized sensorimotor and association areas. The results of our study demonstrate that cortical thickness can be used to estimate individuals' brain maturity with high accuracy, and the estimated ages relate to  functional and behavioural measures, underscoring the relevance and scope of the  study in the understanding of biological maturity.
25749917	35	n = 35	Studies have demonstrated that episodic memory (EM) is often preferentially disrupted in schizophrenia. The neural substrates that mediate EM impairment in this illness are not fully understood. Several functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have employed EM probe tasks to elucidate the neural underpinnings of impairment, though results have been inconsistent. The majority  of EM imaging studies have been conducted in chronic forms of schizophrenia with  relatively few studies in early phase patients. Early phase schizophrenia studies are important because they may provide information regarding when EM deficits occur and address potential confounds more frequently observed in chronic populations. In this study, we assessed brain activation during the performance of visual scene encoding and recognition fMRI tasks in patients with earlyphase psychosis (n = 35) and age, sex, and race matched healthy control subjects (n = 20). Patients demonstrated significantly lower activation than controls in the right hippocampus and left fusiform gyrus during scene encoding and lower activation in the posterior cingulate, precuneus, and left middle temporal cortex during recognition of target scenes. Symptom levels were not related to the imaging findings, though better cognitive performance in patients was associated  with greater right hippocampal activation during encoding. These results provide  evidence of altered function in neuroanatomical circuitry subserving EM early in  the course of psychotic illness, which may have implications for pathophysiological models of this illness.
25749917	20	n = 20
25762915	34	n = 34	Romantic love is a motivational state associated with a desire to enter or maintain a close relationship with a specific other person. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have found activation increases in brain regions involved in the processing of reward, motivation and emotion regulation, when romantic lovers view photographs of their partners. However, not much is known about whether romantic love affects the brain's functional architecture during rest. In the present study, resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rsfMRI) data was collected to compare the regional homogeneity (ReHo) and functional connectivity (FC) across an "in-love" group (LG, N = 34, currently intensely in love), an "ended-love" group (ELG, N = 34, ended romantic relationship recently), and a "single" group (SG, N = 32, never fallen in love).  Results show that: (1) ReHo of the left dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) was significantly increased in the LG (in comparison to the ELG and the SG); (2)  ReHo of the left dACC was positively correlated with length of time in love in the LG, and negatively correlated with the lovelorn duration since breakup in the ELG; (3) FC within the reward, motivation, and emotion regulation network (dACC,  insula, caudate, amygdala, and nucleus accumbens) as well as FC in the social cognition network [temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), inferior parietal, precuneus, and temporal lobe] was significantly increased in the LG (in comparison to the ELG and SG); (4) in most regions within both networks FC was positively correlated with the duration of love in the LG but negatively correlated with the lovelorn duration of time since breakup in the ELG. This study provides first empirical evidence of love-related alterations in brain functional architecture. Furthermore, the results shed light on the underlying neural mechanisms of romantic love, and demonstrate the possibility of applying a resting-state fMRI approach for investigating romantic love.
25762915	34	n = 34
25762915	32	n = 32
25776217	120	n = 120	Increased amygdala reactivity in response to salient stimuli is seen in patients  with affective disorders, in healthy subjects at risk for these disorders, and in stressed individuals, making it a prime target for mechanistic studies into the pathophysiology of affective disorders. However, whereas individual differences in neuroticism are thought to modulate the effect of stress on mental health, the mechanistic link between stress, neuroticism and amygdala responsivity is unknown. Thus, we studied the relationship between experimentally induced stress, individual differences in neuroticism, and amygdala responsivity. To this end, fearful and happy faces were presented to a large cohort of young, healthy males  (n=120) in two separate functional MRI sessions (stress versus control) in a randomized, controlled cross-over design. We revealed that amygdala reactivity was modulated by an interaction between the factors of stress, neuroticism, and the emotional valence of the facial stimuli. Follow-up analysis showed that neuroticism selectively enhanced amygdala responses to fearful faces in the stress condition. Thus, we show that stress unmasks an association between neuroticism and amygdala responsivity to potentially threatening stimuli. This effect constitutes a possible mechanistic link within the complex pathophysiology of affective disorders, and our novel approach appears suitable for further studies targeting the underlying mechanisms.
25788883	22	n = 22	The role of attention in emotional processing is still the subject of debate. Recent studies have found that high positive affect in approach motivation narrows attention. Furthermore, the positive affect trait has been suggested as an important component for determining human variability in threat reactivity. We employed functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate whether different states of attention control would modulate amygdala responses to highly unpleasant pictures relative to neutral and whether this modulation would be influenced by the positive affect trait. Participants (n = 22, 12 male) were scanned while viewing neutral (people) or unpleasant pictures (mutilated bodies)  flanked by two peripheral bars. They were instructed to (a) judge the picture content as unpleasant or neutral or (b) to judge the difference in orientation between the bars in an easy condition (0 or 90( composite function) orientation difference) or (c) in a hard condition (0 or 6( composite function) orientation difference). Whole brain analysis revealed a task main effect of brain areas related to the experimental manipulation of attentional control, including the amygdala, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and posterior parietal cortex. Region of interest analysis showed an inverse correlation (r = -0.51, p < 0.01) between  left amygdala activation and positive affect level when participants viewed unpleasant stimuli and judged bar orientation in the easy condition. This result  suggests that subjects with high positive affect exhibit lower amygdala reactivity to distracting unpleasant pictures. In conclusion, the current study suggests that positive affect modulates attention effect on unpleasant pictures,  therefore attenuating emotional responses.
25799565	15	n = 15	Alterations in reward and punishment processing have been reported in adults suffering from long-term cannabis use. However, previous findings regarding the chronic effects of cannabis on reward and punishment processing have been inconsistent. In the present study, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to reveal the neural correlates of reward and punishment processing in long-term cannabis users (n = 15) and in healthy control subjects (n = 15) with no history of drug abuse. For this purpose, we used the well-established Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) task, a reliable experimental paradigm that allows the differentiation between anticipatory and consummatory aspects of reward and punishment processing. Regarding the gain anticipation period, no significant group differences were observed. In the left caudate and the left inferior frontal gyrus, cannabis users were - in contrast to healthy controls - not able to differentiate between the conditions feedback of reward and control. In addition, cannabis users showed stronger activations in the left caudate and the  bilateral inferior frontal gyrus following feedback of no punishment as compared  to healthy controls. We interpreted these deficits in dorsal striatal functioning as altered stimulus-reward or action-contingent learning in cannabis users. In addition, the enhanced lateral prefrontal activation in cannabis users that is related to non-punishing feedback may reflect a deficit in emotion regulation or  cognitive reappraisal in these subjects.
25799565	15	n = 15
25818870	12	n = 12	Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3, spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 and Friedreich's ataxia are common hereditary ataxias. Different patterns of atrophy of the cerebellar cortex are well known. Data on cerebellar nuclei are sparse. Whereas cerebellar nuclei have long been thought to be preserved in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6, histology shows marked atrophy of the nuclei in Friedreich's ataxia and spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. In the present study susceptibility weighted imaging was used to assess atrophy of the cerebellar nuclei in patients  with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (n = 12, age range 41-76 years, five female),  Friedreich's ataxia (n = 12, age range 21-55 years, seven female), spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (n = 10, age range 34-67 years, three female), and  age- and gender-matched controls (total n = 23, age range 22-75 years, 10 female). T1-weighted magnetic resonance images were used to calculate the volume  of the cerebellum. In addition, ultra-high field functional magnetic resonance imaging was performed with optimized normalization methods to assess function of  the cerebellar cortex and nuclei during simple hand movements. As expected, the volume of the cerebellum was markedly reduced in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6, preserved in Friedreich's ataxia, and mildy reduced in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. The volume of the cerebellar nuclei was reduced in the three patient groups compared to matched controls (P-values < 0.05; two-sample t-tests). Atrophy of the cerebellar nuclei was most pronounced in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6. On a functional level, hand-movement-related cerebellar activation was altered in all three disorders. Within the cerebellar cortex, functional magnetic resonance imaging signal was significantly reduced in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 and Friedreich's ataxia compared to matched controls (P-values < 0.001, bootstrap-corrected cluster-size threshold; two-sample t-tests). The difference missed significance in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. Within the cerebellar nuclei, reductions were significant when comparing spinocerebellar ataxia type 6  and Friedreich's ataxia to matched controls (P < 0.01, bootstrap-corrected cluster-size threshold; two-sample t-tests). Susceptibility weighted imaging allowed depiction of atrophy of the cerebellar nuclei in patients with Friedreich's ataxia and spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. In spinocerebellar ataxia  type 6, pathology was not restricted to the cerebellar cortex but also involved the cerebellar nuclei. Functional magnetic resonance imaging data, on the other hand, revealed that pathology in Friedreich's ataxia and spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 is not restricted to the cerebellar nuclei. There was functional involvement of the cerebellar cortex despite no or little structural changes.
25818870	12	n = 12
25818870	10	n = 10
25818870	23	n = 23
25887261	122	n = 122	During adolescence, considerable social and biological changes occur that interact with functional brain maturation, some of which are sex-specific. The amygdala is one brain area that has displayed sexual dimorphism, specifically in  socio-affective (superficial amygdala [SFA]), stress (centromedial amygdala [CMA]), and learning and memory (basolateral amygdala [BLA]) processing. The amygdala has also been implicated in mood and anxiety disorders which display sex-specific features, most prominently observed during adolescence. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the present study examined the interaction of age and sex on resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) of amygdala sub-regions, BLA and SFA, in a sample of healthy adolescents between the ages 10 and 16years (n=122, 71 boys). Whole-brain, voxel-wise partial correlation analyses were conducted to determine RSFC of bilateral BLA and SFA seed regions,  created using the Eickhoff-Zilles maximum probability maps based on cytoarchitectonic mapping and FMRIB's Integrated Registration and Segmentation Tool (FIRST). Monte Carlo simulation was implemented to correct for multiple comparisons (threshold of 53 contiguous voxels with a z-value>/=2.25). Results indicated that with increasing age, there was a corresponding decrease in RSFC between both amygdala sub-regions and parieto-occipital cortices, with a concurrent increase in RSFC with medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Specifically, boys and girls demonstrated increased coupling of mPFC and left and right SFA with age, respectively; however, neither sex showed increased connectivity between mPFC and BLA, which could indicate relative immaturity of fronto-limbic networks that is similar across sex. A dissociation in connectivity between BLA-  and SFA-parieto-occipital RSFC emerged, in which girls had weaker negative RSFC between SFA and parieto-occipital regions and boys had weaker negative RSFC of BLA and parieto-occipital regions with increased age, both standing in contrast to adult patterns of amygdala sub-regional RSFC. The present findings suggest relative immaturity of amygdala sub-regional RSFC with parieto-occipital cortices during adolescence, with unique patterns in both sexes that may support memory and socio-affective processing in boys and girls, respectively. Understanding the underlying normative functional architecture of brain networks associated with the amygdala during adolescence may better inform future research of the neural features associated with increased risk for internalizing psychopathology.
25899791	40	n = 40	INTRODUCTION: The beta-adrenoceptor antagonist propranolol is known to reduce peripheral and central activity of noradrenaline. A recent study found that intervention with propranolol diminished negative implicit racial bias. MATERIALS AND METHOD: The current study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in order to determine the neural correlates of this effect. Healthy volunteers (N = 40) of white ethnic origin received a single oral dose (40 mg) of propranolol,  in a randomised, double-blind, parallel group, placebo-controlled design, before  viewing unfamiliar faces of same and other race. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: We found significantly reduced activity in the fusiform gyrus and thalamus following propranolol to out-group faces only. Additionally, propranolol lowered the implicit attitude score, without affecting explicit prejudice measure. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that noradrenaline pathways might modulate racial bias by acting on the processing of categorisation in the fusiform gyrus.
25900470	20	n = 20	One of the key features of human interpersonal communication is our ability to integrate information communicated by speech and accompanying gestures. However,  it is still not fully understood how this essential combinatory process is represented in the human brain. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have unanimously attested the relevance of activation in the posterior superior temporal sulcus/middle temporal gyrus (pSTS/MTG), while electroencephalography (EEG) studies have shown oscillatory activity in specific  frequency bands to be associated with multisensory integration. In the current study, we used fMRI and EEG to separately investigate the anatomical and oscillatory neural signature of integrating intrinsically meaningful gestures (IMG; e.g. "Thumbs-up gesture") and corresponding speech (e.g., "The actor did a  good job"). In both the fMRI (n=20) and EEG (n=20) study, participants were presented with videos of an actor either: performing IMG in the context of a German sentence (GG), IMG in the context of a Russian (as a foreign language) sentence (GR), or speaking an isolated German sentence without gesture (SG). The  results of the fMRI experiment confirmed that gesture-speech processing of IMG activates the posterior MTG (GG>GR intersectionGG>SG). In the EEG experiment we found that the identical integration process (GG>GR intersectionGG>SG) is related to a centrally-distributed alpha (7-13Hz) power decrease within 700-1400ms post-onset of the critical word. These new findings suggest that BOLD response increase in the pMTG and alpha power decrease represent the neural correlates of  integrating intrinsically meaningful gestures with their corresponding speech.
25900470	20	n = 20
25911418	26	n = 26	Notwithstanding the significant role that human-robot interactions (HRI) will play in the near future, limited research has explored the neural correlates of feeling eerie in response to social robots. To address this empirical lacuna, the current investigation examined brain activity using functional magnetic resonance imaging while a group of participants (n = 26) viewed a series of human-human interactions (HHI) and HRI. Although brain sites constituting the mentalizing network were found to respond to both types of interactions, systematic neural variation across sites signaled diverging social-cognitive strategies during HHI  and HRI processing. Specifically, HHI elicited increased activity in the left temporal-parietal junction indicative of situation-specific mental state attributions, whereas HRI recruited the precuneus and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) suggestive of script-based social reasoning. Activity in the VMPFC also tracked feelings of eeriness towards HRI in a parametric manner, revealing a potential neural correlate for a phenomenon known as the uncanny valley. By demonstrating how understanding social interactions depends on the kind of agents involved, this study highlights pivotal sub-routes of impression formation and identifies prominent challenges in the use of humanoid robots.
25913703	18	n = 18	Brain regions in the "pain matrix", can be activated by observing or reading about others in physical pain. In previous research, we found that reading stories about others' emotional suffering, by contrast, recruits a different group of brain regions mostly associated with thinking about others' minds. In the current study, we examined the neural circuits responsible for deliberately regulating empathic responses to others' pain and suffering. In Study 1, a sample of college-aged participants (n=18) read stories about physically painful and emotionally distressing events during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), while either actively empathizing with the main character or trying to remain objective. In Study 2, the same experiment was performed with professional social workers, who are chronically exposed to human suffering (n=21). Across both studies activity in the amygdala was associated with empathic regulation towards others' emotional pain, but not their physical pain. In addition, psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis and Granger causal modeling (GCM)  showed that amygdala activity while reading about others' emotional pain was preceded by and positively coupled with activity in the theory of mind brain regions, and followed by and negatively coupled with activity in regions associated with physical pain and bodily sensations. Previous work has shown that the amygdala is critically involved in the deliberate control of self-focused distress - the current results extend the central importance of amygdala activity to the control of other-focused empathy, but only when considering others' emotional pain.
25913703	21	n = 21
25930011	69	n = 69	How does the developing brain support the transition from spoken language to print? Two spoken language abilities form the initial base of child literacy across languages: knowledge of language sounds (phonology) and knowledge of the smallest units that carry meaning (morphology). While phonology has received much attention from the field, the brain mechanisms that support morphological competence for learning to read remain largely unknown. In the present study, young English-speaking children completed an auditory morphological awareness task behaviorally (n = 69, ages 6-12) and in fMRI (n = 16). The data revealed two findings: First, children with better morphological abilities showed greater activation in left temporoparietal regions previously thought to be important for supporting phonological reading skills, suggesting that this region supports multiple language abilities for successful reading acquisition. Second, children  showed activation in left frontal regions previously found active in young Chinese readers, suggesting morphological processes for reading acquisition might be similar across languages. These findings offer new insights for developing a comprehensive model of how spoken language abilities support children's reading acquisition across languages. Hum Brain Mapp, 2015. (c) 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
25930011	16	n = 16
25934396	33	n = 33	Psychostimulants are the first-line treatment in attention deficit/hyperactivity  disorder (ADHD), but their effects on brain development remain poorly understood. In particular, previous structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) studies only investigated treatment effects on grey matter (GM) volumes in selected regions of interest (ROIs). In this study, voxel-based morphometry (VBM) was used to assess  medication-related GM volume differences across the entire brain. Automated tracing measurements of selected ROIs were also obtained. Three groups (77 participants aged 7-to-13 year old) underwent MRI scans and were compared: never-medicated children with ADHD (n=33), medicated (methylphenidate) children with ADHD (n=20) and typically developing children (TD; n=24). Optimised VBM was  used to investigate regional GM volumes, controlling for age and gender. Automated tracing procedures were also used to assess the average volume of the caudate nucleus, the amygdala and the nucleus accumbens. When compared to both medicated children with ADHD and TD children, never-medicated children with ADHD  exhibited decreased GM volume in the insula and in the middle temporal gyrus. When compared to TD children, medicated children with ADHD had decreased GM volume in the middle frontal gyrus and in the precentral gyrus. Finally, ROI analyses revealed a significant association between duration of treatment and GM  volume of the left nucleus accumbens in medicated children with ADHD. In conclusion, this study documents potential methylphenidate-related GM volume normalization and deviation in previously unexplored brain structures, and reports a positive association between treatment history and GM volume in the nucleus accumbens, a key region for reward-processing.
25934396	20	n = 20
25934396	24	n = 24
25950551	53	n = 53	The ability to attribute mental states to others, or "mentalizing," is posited to involve specific subnetworks within the overall default mode network (DMN), but this question needs clarification. To determine which default mode (DM) subnetworks are engaged by mentalizing processes, we assessed task-related recruitment of DM subnetworks. Spatial independent component analysis (sICA) applied to fMRI data using relatively high-order model (75 components). Healthy participants (n = 53, ages 17-60) performed two fMRI tasks: an interactive game involving mentalizing (Domino), a semantic memory task (SORT), and a resting state fMRI scan. sICA of the two tasks split the DMN into 10 subnetworks located  in three core regions: medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC; five subnetworks), posterior cingulate/precuneus (PCC/PrC; three subnetworks), and bilateral temporoparietal junction (TPJ). Mentalizing events increased recruitment in five  of 10 DM subnetworks, located in all three core DMN regions. In addition, three of these five DM subnetworks, one dmPFC subnetwork, one PCC/PrC subnetwork, and the right TPJ subnetwork, showed reduced recruitment by semantic memory task events. The opposing modulation by the two tasks suggests that these three DM subnetworks are specifically engaged in mentalizing. Our findings, therefore, suggest the unique involvement of mentalizing processes in only three of 10 DM subnetworks, and support the importance of the dmPFC, PCC/PrC, and right TPJ in mentalizing as described in prior studies. Hum Brain Mapp, 2015. (c) 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
25973923	7	n = 7	Controlled slow breathing (at 6/min, a rate frequently adopted during yoga practice) can benefit cardiovascular function, including responses to hypoxia. We tested the neural substrates of cardiorespiratory control in humans during volitional controlled breathing and hypoxic challenge using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Twenty healthy volunteers were scanned during paced (slow and normal rate) breathing and during spontaneous breathing of normoxic and hypoxic (13% inspired O2) air. Cardiovascular and respiratory measures were acquired concurrently, including beat-to-beat blood pressure from a subset of participants (N = 7). Slow breathing was associated with increased tidal ventilatory volume. Induced hypoxia raised heart rate and suppressed heart rate variability. Within the brain, slow breathing activated dorsal pons, periaqueductal grey matter, cerebellum, hypothalamus, thalamus and lateral and anterior insular cortices. Blocks of hypoxia activated mid pons, bilateral amygdalae, anterior insular and occipitotemporal cortices. Interaction between slow breathing and hypoxia was expressed in ventral striatal and frontal polar activity. Across conditions, within brainstem, dorsal medullary and pontine activity correlated with tidal volume and inversely with heart rate. Activity in  rostroventral medulla correlated with beat-to-beat blood pressure and heart rate  variability. Widespread insula and striatal activity tracked decreases in heart rate, while subregions of insular cortex correlated with momentary increases in tidal volume. Our findings define slow breathing effects on central and cardiovascular responses to hypoxic challenge. They highlight the recruitment of  discrete brainstem nuclei to cardiorespiratory control, and the engagement of corticostriatal circuitry in support of physiological responses that accompany breathing regulation during hypoxic challenge.
25976926	11	n = 11	INTRODUCTION: Paired associative stimulation (PAS), is a novel non-invasive technique where two neural substrates are employed in a temporally coordinated manner in order to modulate cortico-motor excitability within the motor cortex (M1). In swallowing, combined pharyngeal electrical and transcranial-magnetic-stimulation induced beneficial neurophysiological and behavioural effects in healthy subjects and dysphagic stroke patients. Here, we aimed to investigate the whole-brain changes in neural activation during swallowing using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) following PAS application and in parallel assess associated GABA changes with magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). METHODS: Healthy adults (n=11, 38+/-9years old) were randomised to receive real and sham PAS to the 'stronger' motor cortex pharyngeal representation, on 2 separate visits. Following PAS, event-related fMRI was performed to assess changes in brain activation in response to water and saliva swallowing and during rest. Data were analysed (SPM8) at P<.001. MRS data  were acquired using MEGA-PRESS before and after the fMRI acquisitions on both visits and GABA concentrations were measured (AMARES, jMRUI). RESULTS: Following  real PAS, BOLD signal changes (group analyses) increased at the site of stimulation during water and saliva swallowing, compared to sham PAS. It is also  evident that PAS induced significant increases in BOLD signal to contralateral (to stimulation) hemispheric areas that are of importance to the swallowing neural network. Following real PAS, GABA:creatine ratio showed a trend to increase contralateral to PAS. CONCLUSION: Targeted PAS applied to the human pharyngeal motor cortex induces local and remote changes in both primary and non-primary areas for water and saliva tasks. There is a possibility that changes of the inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA, may play a role in the changes in BOLD  signal. These findings provide evidence for the mechanisms underlying the beneficial effects of PAS on the brain swallowing network.
25978933	20	n = 20	Neuroimaging studies of children with anxiety disorders are limited, and no study has examined children who are at increased risk for developing anxiety disorders  based on parental anxiety. The objective of this study was to examine the function of frontal and limbic brain regions using functional magnetic resonance  imaging (fMRI) in children at risk for anxiety disorders. Study participants included high-risk children (n=20) who had at least one parent with a primary diagnosis of social anxiety disorder and normal-risk control children (n=19). Using fMRI, we measured the blood oxygenation level dependent response while high-risk and normal-risk children were exposed to different emotional facial stimuli. We found greater activation of frontal, temporal and limbic regions in high-risk children relative to normal-risk children during the presentation of emotional stimuli (angry and happy). These regions included the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, hippocampus and insula. Our within-group analysis revealed similar patterns of hyperactivity in high-risk children with and without current anxiety symptoms. To our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate functional alterations in emotion-processing brain regions in children who are at risk for anxiety disorders based on parental anxiety. These findings are consistent with previous fMRI studies of pediatric anxiety and behaviorally inhibited children, and they contribute to our understanding of the  neural correlates of risk for anxiety disorders.
25978933	19	n = 19
25998539	21	n = 21	Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic imprinting disorder characterized mainly by hyperphagia and early childhood obesity. Previous fMRI studies examined the activation of eating-related neural circuits in PWS patients with or without exposures to food cues and found an excessive eating motivation and a reduced inhibitory control of cognitive processing of food. However, the effective connectivity between various brain areas or neural circuitry critically implicated in both the biological and behavioral control of overeating in PWS is  largely unexplored. The current study combined resting-state fMRI and Granger causality analysis (GCA) techniques to investigate interactive causal influences  among key neural pathways underlying overeating in PWS. We first defined the regions of interest (ROIs) that demonstrated significant alterations of the baseline brain activity levels in children with PWS (n=21) as compared to that of their normal siblings controls (n=18), and then carried out GCA to characterize the region-to-region interactions among these ROIs. Our data revealed significantly enhanced causal influences from the amygdala to the hypothalamus and from both the medial prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex to the amygdala in patients with PWS (P<0.001). These alterations offer new explanations for hypothalamic regulation of homeostatic energy intake and impairment in inhibitory control circuit. The deficits in these dual aspects may jointly contribute to the extreme hyperphagia in PWS. This study provides both a new methodological and a neurobiological perspective to aid in a better understanding of neural mechanisms underlying obesity in the general public. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 1618.
25998539	18	n = 18
26000753	8	n = 8	OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between hippocampal functional connectivity (HFC), cognitive deficits, and the influence of BDNF Val66Met polymorphism on the HFC in acute late-onset depression (LOD). METHODS: 26 LOD patients and 33 and normal controls (NCs) completed clinical assessments, neuropsychological testing, blood samples collecting for genotyping, and resting-state functional MRI (R-fMRI) scans. The LOD and NCs groups were further  divided into four groups according to BDNF Met allele carrier or not (LOD Met-(n=8); LOD Met+(n=18); NCs Met-(n=9); NCs Met+(n=24)). Then, seed-based correlation analyses and two-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) were performed to explore the main effects and interactive effects of LOD and BDNF Val66Met polymorphism on the HFC. Spearman correlation was applied to examine the cognitive and emotional significance of these altered HFC networks. RESULTS: Compared with NCs, bilateral positive HFC with the right insula, left positive HFC with bilateral orbit-frontal cortex (OFC) and left precuneus, right positive  HFC with right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) were decreased, and bilateral negative HFC with right postcentral gyrus were reversed in LOD patients. BDNF Met allele mainly decreased bilateral positive HFC with the cerebellum. The interaction of LOD and BDNF Met allele primarily influenced the bilateral HFC with the temporal cortex and dorsal nexus. The changed HFC with the OFC, postcentral gyrus, cerebellum and temporal cortex significantly correlated to the cognitive deterioration. There was no significant association between the  depressive severity and any altered HFC networks. CONCLUSION: The cognitive deterioration in LOD patients, BDNF Met allele carriers, and LOD patients carring Met allele were associated with the changed HFC networks in the OFC/postcentral gyrus, cerebellum and temporal cortex respectively.
26000753	18	n = 18
26000753	9	n = 9
26000753	24	n = 24
26000902	46	n = 46	Social anxiety is characterized by an excessive fear of being embarrassed in social interactions or social performance situations. Emotional support can help  to decrease or diminish social distress. Such support may play an important role  at different points of social interaction. However, it is unclear how the beneficial effects of social support are represented in the brains of socially anxious individuals. To explore this, we used the same paradigm previously used to examine the effects of emotional support on social pain caused by exclusion. Undergraduates (n = 46) showing a wide range of social anxiety scores underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while participating in a Cyberball game. Participants were initially included and later excluded from the game. In the latter half of the session in which participants were excluded, they were provided with supportive messages. In line with our previous work, we found that  social exclusion led to increased anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) activity, whereas emotional support led to increased left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) activity. Despite validation of the paradigm, social anxiety was not associated with increased ACC activity during social exclusion, or during perceived emotional support. Instead, fear of negative evaluation as assessed by  the Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation (BFNE) scale showed positive associations with left DLPFC activation while receiving emotional support, compared to while being socially excluded. The more socially anxious an individual was, the greater was the left DLPFC activity increased during receipt of messages. This suggests that highly socially anxious people still have the ability to perceive social support, but that they are nevertheless susceptible to negative evaluation by others.
26004037	17	n = 17	Non-clinical depressive symptoms (nCDSs) are highly prevalent in young adults and may be associated with the risk of developing full-fledged depressive disorders.  However, the neural basis underlying nCDSs remains unknown. To explore the alteration of spontaneous brain activity in individuals with nCDSs compared with  healthy controls (HCs), we investigated resting-state brain activity using the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations (ALFF) in subjects with nCDSs (n=17) and  HCs (n=20). All subjects were drawn from a sample of 1105 college students participating in a survey assessing depressive symptoms. We determined that nCDSs can lead to reduced ALFF in the right ventral lateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and to increased ALFF in the left fusiform, left posterior cerebellum, right cuneus, left inferior parietal lobule, right supramarginal gyrus and bilateral precuneus. In addition, with respect to Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) scores and ALFF values in subjects with nCDSs, a positive correlation was discovered in the right DLPFC, while a negative correlation was identified in left posterior cerebellum and bilateral precuneus after correction. These results indicate that nCDSs are characterized by altered spontaneous activity in several important functional regions. We suggest that altered ALFFs in the right DLPFC, left posterior cerebellum and bilateral precuneus may be biomarkers that are related to the pathophysiology of  nCDSs in young adults.
26004037	20	n = 20
26029629	13	n = 13	Auditory scene analysis is a demanding computational process that is performed automatically and efficiently by the healthy brain but vulnerable to the neurodegenerative pathology of Alzheimer's disease. Here we assessed the functional neuroanatomy of auditory scene analysis in Alzheimer's disease using the well-known 'cocktail party effect' as a model paradigm whereby stored templates for auditory objects (e.g., hearing one's spoken name) are used to segregate auditory 'foreground' and 'background'. Patients with typical amnestic  Alzheimer's disease (n = 13) and age-matched healthy individuals (n = 17) underwent functional 3T-MRI using a sparse acquisition protocol with passive listening to auditory stimulus conditions comprising the participant's own name interleaved with or superimposed on multi-talker babble, and spectrally rotated (unrecognisable) analogues of these conditions. Name identification (conditions containing the participant's own name contrasted with spectrally rotated analogues) produced extensive bilateral activation involving superior temporal cortex in both the AD and healthy control groups, with no significant differences between groups. Auditory object segregation (conditions with interleaved name sounds contrasted with superimposed name sounds) produced activation of right posterior superior temporal cortex in both groups, again with no differences between groups. However, the cocktail party effect (interaction of own name identification with auditory object segregation processing) produced activation of right supramarginal gyrus in the AD group that was significantly enhanced compared with the healthy control group. The findings delineate an altered functional neuroanatomical profile of auditory scene analysis in Alzheimer's disease that may constitute a novel computational signature of this neurodegenerative pathology.
26029629	17	n = 17
26065376	117	n = 117	Trait impulsivity and poor inhibitory control are well-established risk factors for alcohol misuse, yet little is known about the associated neurobiological endophenotypes. Here we examined correlations among brain physiology and self-reported trait impulsive behavior, impaired control over drinking, and a behavioral measure of response inhibition. A sample of healthy drinkers (n=117) completed a pulsed arterial spin labeling (PASL) scan to quantify resting regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF), as well as measures of self-reported impulsivity (Eysenck I7 Impulsivity scale) and impaired control over drinking. A  subset of subjects (n=40) performed a stop signal task during blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging to assess brain regions involved in response inhibition. Eysenck I7 scores were inversely related to blood flow in the right precentral gyrus. Significant BOLD activation during response inhibition occurred in an overlapping right frontal motor/premotor region. Moreover, impaired control over drinking was associated with reduced BOLD response in the same region. These findings suggest that impulsive personality and impaired control over drinking are associated with brain physiology in areas  implicated in response inhibition. This is consistent with the idea that difficulty controlling behavior is due in part to impairment in motor restraint systems.
26065376	40	n = 40
26073417	47	n = 47	BACKGROUND: The functional localization of negativity bias, an influential index  of emotion information processing, has yet to be identified. METHOD: Depressed (n=47) and healthy participants (n=58) completed a clinical interview for DSM-IV  Axis I disorders, symptom checklists, a behavioral task to measure negativity bias, and then viewed positive and negative images of social and nonsocial scenes during an event-related fMRI task. Two subsamples of participants with high (i.e., 75%; n=26) and low (i.e., 25%; n=26) negativity bias scores were as included in subsequent analyses to examine neural differences. RESULTS: Depressed participants with a higher, relative to lower, negative bias showed significantly greater neural activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus. CONCLUSION: High negativity bias evokes a distinctive pattern of brain activation in the frontal cortex of depressed participants. Increased activation occurred in the left inferior frontal gyrus, related to Brodmann area 44, which is associated with language and semantic processing, response inhibition, and cognitive reappraisal. This finding may reflect an abnormality in integrative emotional processing rather than processing of individual emotional dimensions in depressed participants with negativity bias.
26073417	58	n = 58
26073417	26	n = 26
26073417	26	n = 26
26076493	42	n = 42	OBJECTIVE: Approximately 10% of young adults report non-medical use of stimulants (cocaine, amphetamine, methylphenidate), which puts them at risk for the development of dependence. This fMRI study investigates whether subjects at early stages of stimulant use show altered decision making processing. METHODS: 158 occasional stimulants users (OSU) and 50 comparison subjects (CS) performed a "risky gains" decision making task during which they could select safe options (cash in 20 cents) or gamble them for double or nothing in two consecutive gambles (win or lose 40 or 80 cents, "risky decisions"). The primary analysis focused on risky versus safe decisions. Three secondary analyses were conducted:  First, a robust regression examined the effect of lifetime exposure to stimulants and marijuana; second, subgroups of OSU with >1000 (n = 42), or <50 lifetime marijuana uses (n = 32), were compared to CS with <50 lifetime uses (n = 46) to examine potential marijuana effects; third, brain activation associated with behavioral adjustment following monetary losses was probed. RESULTS: There were no behavioral differences between groups. OSU showed attenuated activation across risky and safe decisions in prefrontal cortex, insula, and dorsal striatum, exhibited lower anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and dorsal striatum activation for risky decisions and greater inferior frontal gyrus activation for safe decisions. Those OSU with relatively more stimulant use showed greater dorsal ACC and posterior insula attenuation. In comparison, greater lifetime marijuana use was associated with less neural differentiation between risky and safe decisions. OSU who chose more safe responses after losses exhibited similarities with CS relative to those preferring risky options. DISCUSSION: Individuals at risk for the development of stimulant use disorders presented less differentiated neural processing of risky and safe options. Specifically, OSU show attenuated brain response in regions critical for performance monitoring, reward processing and interoceptive awareness. Marijuana had additive effects by diminishing neural risk differentiation.
26076493	32	n = 32
26076493	46	n = 46
26096356	178	n = 178	Physical frailty has been recognized as a clinical syndrome resulting from declines in various physiological systems; however, the role of the central nervous system in the pathophysiology of frailty remains unclear. The I-Lan Longitudinal Aging Study randomly sampled community-dwelling people aged 50 or older for a brain magnetic resonance imaging study. All participants were assessed for frailty status (robust, prefrail, and frail) based on the presence of five frailty components: slow walking speed, muscle weakness, low physical activity, exhaustion and weight loss (Fried criteria). Gray matter volume (GMV) changes associated with frailty status and individual frailty components were examined. Overall, 456 participants (64.0 +/- 8.5 years, 47.6% women) were included in this study. The prefrail (n = 178, 39.0%) and frail (n = 19, 4.2%) subjects were grouped for analysis. The prefrail-frail group showed reduced GMV,  compared to the robust group (n = 259, 56.8%), in the cerebellum, hippocampi, middle frontal gyri, and several other cerebral regions (corrected P < 0.05). Each frailty component was associated with GMV changes in functionally related brain areas. Hierarchical cluster analysis categorized these components into three subsets. Motor-related components, including weakness, low activity, and slowness, comprised one subset with a common cerebellar involvement. Exhaustion and weight loss were the other two subsets without cerebellar changes. To conclude, physical frailty is associated with a decreased reserve in specific brain regions, especially cerebellum. Further longitudinal studies are needed to  explore if the cerebellum- and noncerebellum-based frailty components reflect a distinctive future risk for developing frailty. Hum Brain Mapp, 2015. (c) 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
26096356	19	n = 19
26096356	259	n = 259
